A R T I C L E

BYSTANDER EDUCATION:
BRINGING A BROADER
COMMUNITY PERSPECTIVE TO
SEXUAL VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Victoria L. Banyard, Elizabethe G. Plante,
and Mary M. Moynihan
University of New Hampshire

䡲
Recent research documents the problem of sexual violence across
communities, often finding its causes to be embedded in community and
cultural norms, thus demonstrating the need for community-focused
solutions. In this article we synthesize research from community psychology
on community change and prevention with more individually focused
studies of sexual violence prevention programs and bystander behavior
in emergency and crime situations. The purpose of bringing together this
research is to outline a new area of focus for sexual violence prevention:
the mobilization of prosocial behavior on the part of potential bystanders.
This approach has utility for increasing community receptivity to
prevention messages, by decreasing resistance to them, and for increasing
the likelihood of community members taking an active role in prevention
and intervention. The specific case of sexual violence prevention on
college campus communities illustrates this approach. © 2004 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

INTRODUCTION
Sexual violence is a widespread problem across communities ~e.g., Abbey, Ross, &
McDuffie 1996; Fisher, Cullen, & Turner, 2000; Himelein, 1995; Koss, Gidycz, &
Wisniewski, 1987; Synovitz & Byrne, 1998!. A growing literature on prevention efforts
confirms the increasing recognition of this problem ~e.g., Lonsway, 1996! but also
This project was supported by Grant No. 2202-WG-BX-0009 awarded by the National Institute of Justice,
Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Points of view in this document are those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice.
Correspondence to: Victoria L. Banyard, Department of Psychology, University of New Hampshire, 10
Library Way, Durham, NH 03824. E-mail: vlb@cisunix.unh.edu

JOURNAL OF COMMUNITY PSYCHOLOGY, Vol. 32, No. 1, 61–79 (2004)
© 2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/jcop.10078

62

•

Journal of Community Psychology, January 2004

demonstrates mixed results on efficacy. This outcome calls for more empirical evaluation of sexual violence prevention programs and the continued development of
program innovations that are grounded in strong theoretical literature about mechanisms of proposed change ~e.g., Lonsway, 1996; Yeater & Donohue, 1999!. In this
article we begin with an overview of recent reviews of the sexual violence prevention
literature. Such a review is an important starting point for the discussion of the next
steps in the development of prevention programs. We then posit that the broader
literature in social and community psychology offers significant application in terms
of new theoretical concepts for expanding sexual-violence prevention efforts within
the high-risk community of college campuses as an illustrative example.
Specifically, we highlight the importance of interventions with a bystander focus
that go beyond an emphasis on the individual level discussed by previous researchers
~e.g., Berkowitz, 2002! or beyond a focus only on men ~e.g., Foubert, 2000; Foubert &
Marriott, 1997; Schwartz & DeKeseredy, 1997! to models of community levels of
change. In addition, we review the literature on theories of community readiness to
change ~e.g., Edwards, Jumper-Thurman, Plested, Oetting, & Swanson, 2000!, competent communities and social action ~e.g., Dalton, Elias, & Wandersman, 2001 for a
review!, and studies of helping and bystander intervention behavior ~e.g., Shotland &
Goodstein, 1984!. From this review, we move to our proposal of a theoretical model
for an added avenue of sexual violence prevention education. Our conceptual model
focuses on increasing community members’ receptivity to prevention messages through
training and supporting bystander behaviors. The purpose of this model is to help all
community members become more sensitive to issues of sexual violence and teach
them skills to intervene with the intent to prevent assaults from occurring and provide
support to survivors who may disclose.

THE IMPORTANCE OF A FOCUS ON
SEXUAL VIOLENCE AND CAMPUS
AS AN AT-RISK COMMUNITY
To date, an array of empirical research documents the problem of sexual violence.
Koss and Harvey ~1991! in summarizing a variety of research, report that one in five
women has experienced sexual violence in their lifetime. And, while women are
victims far more often then men, 9.43% of all rapes and sexual assaults—nearly one
in ten—happen to men ~U.S. Department of Justice, 1996!. Approximately 50% of
college women experience some form of unwanted sexual activity ~Abbey, Ross, &
McDuffie, 1996; Himelein, 1995; Koss, Gidycz, & Wisniewski, 1987; Synovitz & Byrne,
1998!. The recent National College Women Sexual Victimization study ~Fisher, Cullen,
& Turner, 2000! finds a rate of 2.8% of women experience the most serious forms of
sexual violence, rape, or attempted rape during the college academic year. Studies
such as the one conducted by Larimer, Lydum, Anderson, and Turner ~1999! show
that college men also report unwanted sexual experiences.
Moreover, a great deal of research demonstrates that exposure to sexual violence
is associated with a multiplicity of negative outcomes. These results include increased
substance use, depressive symptoms, health risk behaviors, and symptoms of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder among various samples of survivors ~e.g., Acierno, Brady,
Gray, Kilpatrick, Resnick, & Best, 2002; Arata & Burkhart, 1996; Banyard, Williams, &
Siegel, 2001; Brener, McMahon, Warren, & Douglas, 1999; Campbell & Soeken, 1999;

Bystander Education

•

63

Larimer et al., 1999!. Researchers found these effects across clinical, community, and
college samples.
Discussions of causal factors fit best within an ecological model ~Bronfenbrenner,
1980!. For example, Koss and Dinero ~1989! found risk factors for victimization among
college students at all levels of the ecological model including intrapersonal factors
such as past abuse history and situational variables including the presence of alcohol
and alcohol use. Studies of risk for perpetration are similar and include variables held
by the individual such as rape myth acceptance ~e.g., Nagayama & Barongan, 1997 for
a review!, or drug and alcohol use ~e.g., Schwartz & Nogrady, 1996!, as well as the key
role of community norms and beliefs. For example, Schwartz and Nogrady ~1996!
highlight the importance of norms within the broader community of men. Using
specially created measures of peer support for such things as patriarchal attitudes,
rape myths, and attachment to friends who themselves have engaged in sexually
coercive behaviors, Schwartz and DeKeseredy ~2000! found higher rates of sexual
violence across the community on campuses with higher levels of “male peer support”
for sexual violence.
Feminist analyses of the causes of sexual violence also point to the need to take a
broader ecological perspective by examining the ways in which larger community and
societal issues such as gender inequality, along with male social control and entitlement, permeate the foundation of attitudes that condone violence against women,
blame individuals for their own victimization, and pair sexuality and aggression ~e.g.,
Brownmiller, 1975; Koss et al., 1994; Rafter & Stanko, 1982; Sanday, 1981, 1996;
Stanko, 1985, 1990, 1995; Yllo, 1993; Yodanis, Godenzi, & Stanko, 2000!. Such theoretical perspectives suggest that sexual violence will be eliminated only when broader
social norms are also addressed and a broader range of audiences is reached.
SEXUAL VIOLENCE PREVENTION IN A BROADER
COMMUNITY CONTEXT
Views about the causes of sexual violence provide the foundation of information on
which practitioners base interventions and prevention programs. Breitenbecher’s ~2000!
review highlights the overall effectiveness of many of these programs. She reports, for
example, that these programs’ outcomes provide support for the positive impact on a
variety of sexual violence prevention strategies. Particularly in relation to the college
population’s attitudes about sexual violence, findings substantiate positive changes in
adversarial sexual beliefs, increased knowledge about sexual violence, and reduction
of risky dating behaviors such as use of alcohol.
Such positive findings notwithstanding, some researchers criticize sexual violence
prevention efforts for focusing too much on individuals or small groups, such as
athletes or fraternity members, at the neglect of attending to wider social change ~e.g.,
Swift & Ryan-Finn, 1995!. Swift and Ryan-Finn state, “prevention approaches must go
beyond changing individuals to changing the system that creates and maintains sexual
abuse” ~1995, p. 20!. The history of the rape crisis center movement and studies of its
effectiveness underscore the importance of social change through community education at a primary prevention level as well as work at the secondary and tertiary ones to
expand safety nets for victims ~e.g., Koss & Harvey, 1991!. In their review of research
on the effectiveness of rape crisis centers, Koss and Harvey note that, “whatever
qualities may distinguish these programs from one another, none is ‘separatist’ in its
orientation to social and community change. Instead, each is a leader and a partici-

64

•

Journal of Community Psychology, January 2004

pant in community affairs, able to catalyze change in other settings ~Koss & Harvey,
1991, p. 151!.” A key component of success, then, is the ability to engage the broader
community in attitude and behavioral change efforts. We need prevention efforts at
all levels of the ecological model.
GETTING THE COMMUNITY TO LISTEN
In addition to the issues noted above, part of the challenge of sexual violence prevention in a community context also consists of finding ways to get the community to
listen to the message. By examining this challenge in terms of prevention at the
community level, researchers at the Tri-ethnic Center for Prevention Research at
Colorado State University describe how communities may vary in their readiness to
change around a particular prevention effort. They bring together Prochaska and
DiClemente’s transtheoretical model of change—a widely used model for understanding individuals’ readiness to change a variety of health behaviors ~Grimley, Prochaska,
Velicer, Blais, & DiClemente, 1994!—and models of community development to inform
their prevention efforts in the area of substance abuse ~Edwards et al., 2000; Oetting
et al., 1995; Plested, Smitham, Jumper-Thurman, Oetting, & Edwards, 1999!. The
researchers describe a series of interviews to be conducted with key informants in
communities to gain an understanding of where a community is in its receptiveness to
broader community change and social norms initiatives. The model indicates that
different prevention strategies will be most effective as communities move from “no”
or “little awareness” of the problem toward preparation to addressing the problem
and ultimately to expanding and making permanent efforts to address the problem.
Assessing where communities are in their readiness to change around certain social
problems will enhance the effectiveness of prevention efforts.
Using Edwards et al.’s ~2000! community-readiness model may perhaps help us
envision some next stages of change for sexual violence prevention. Some communities have moved beyond the historical perspective that sexual violence does not exist
or is a problem only in other places to noticing and developing crisis centers that deal
with the problem. Many communities have moved to the stage of “professionalization”
in terms of the high quality of services offered by crisis centers. Even so, these same
communities may tend to rely solely on such centers to deal with the problem, thereby
absolving the broader community from sharing the responsibility for sexual-violence
prevention. We hold that future developments must focus on efforts to have all community members take responsibility for playing a role in ending sexual and interpersonal violence on campus. Again, using the specific case of college communities,
Potter et al. ~2000! state, “The mere existence of such @sexual violence# programs is
not enough, however. The intent of the programs and their content must be conveyed
to all members of the university community in a clear and consistent manner . . . to
further spread the campus community expectation that such behavior is not acceptable” ~p. 1351!. The work of Edwards et al. ~2000, cited above! also suggests that
alterations in prevention efforts must continue as communities move forward in making changes. What seems most significant to the current discussion about this work is
the way it puts emphasis on the importance of receptivity and resistance of a community to prevention ideas.
The sexual violence prevention literature indicates the level of difficulty associated with receptivity to prevention messages. Research suggests that no one program
works for all participants, and individual differences ~e.g., history of sexual violence!

Bystander Education

•

65

may impact the effectiveness of program messages ~e.g., Heppner, Neville, Smith,
Kivlighan, & Gershuny, 1999; Lonsway, 1996!. Breitenbecher ~2000! notes mixed findings from prevention programs on such things as attitudes toward women and reports
of the likelihood of using sexually coercive behaviors. She reviews the relative lack of
evidence supporting the conclusion that existing prevention programs increase empathy for sexual violence victims, improve sexual communication around issues such as
consent, or reduce endorsement of the notion that interpersonal violence is acceptable.
A central problem for such programs then, is the lack of receptivity to their
prevention messages. Schewe and O’Donohue ~1993!, for example, critically assess
sexual violence prevention programs that focus heavily on women as potential victims
and teach strategies for self-protection. They discuss the limitations of such an approach
both in terms of the injustice to women by putting the responsibility for prevention on
their shoulders and in terms of the lack of efficacy of such an approach. Women may
get the message that they are supposed to control men’s sexuality and that women are
responsible for all aspects of sexual encounters, what Koss and Harvey ~1991! describe
as the “rape avoidance approach” ~p. 114!. Some critics focus on problems related to
motivating participants to be involved enough to think deeply about prevention material and apply it to their own lives. Lonsway ~1996! notes that, “it is likely that beliefs
regarding rape will indeed be held with heightened intensity and commitment, and to
that extent resistance would seem to be virtually inevitable when attempting to produce change” ~p. 252!. Other critics express concern that, depending on the delivery
of the message, some men may erroneously “hear” a prevention message targeting
them as potential rapists only while women see themselves mainly as potential victims.
Participants may develop a great deal of defensiveness toward viewing themselves in
such roles, hence increasing resistance to sexual violence prevention messages. In
their work on this specific problem, Heppner et al. ~1995; 1999! found that men may
be more likely to engage in peripheral processing during sexual violence prevention
programs because they see the message of the education program as negative toward
men. In conclusion, it is crucial for sexual violence prevention that programs get both
men and women to really listen to prevention messages and find ways to target all
community members rather than select groups of at-risk individuals.
NEXT STEPS
Consequently, we need to go further in our efforts to enhance the receptivity of
prevention program messages. Koss and Harvey ~1991! carefully detail the importance
and applicability of community psychology principles and analyses to the problem of
sexual violence. Even so, the empirical sexual violence prevention literature reviewed
earlier in this article shows that much more emphasis being placed on rape avoidance
~e.g., Schewe & O’Donohue, 1993 for a review!, criminal justice policies versus health
promotion ~e.g., Berkowitz, 2002; Potter et al., 2000!, and more individual-centered
efforts with small groups of students. A full community perspective demands that we
not stop here but that we continue to build individual and community competence in
the face of sexual violence and more fully engage all community members in the
process of sexual violence prevention. This latter involvement must go beyond teaching men how to stop being perpetrators or women how to avoid being victims but
must also “combine educational activities to build individual competence with action
strategies to create new social supports for those at risk” ~Koss & Harvey, 1991, p. 280!.
In addition, we must develop further approaches to support feminist and community

66

•

Journal of Community Psychology, January 2004

psychology strategies that focus on social action and changing community norms ~e.g.,
Schwartz & DeKeseredy, 1997!. Such work can only occur in the context of programs
that increase community members’ receptivity to and engagement with prevention
messages and decrease defensive resistance while teaching prevention skills that are
applicable and useful to a wider array of community members. To assist us with this
process, we use a theoretical model that builds on the work of Koss and Harvey ~1991!
but that targets the area of sexual violence prevention with a focus on placing a sense
of responsibility and empowerment for ending sexual violence on the shoulders of all
community members. By placing community change and work in community psychology at the center of program development, we may be able to develop and implement
additional program tools that decrease resistance and foster community responsibility.
In addition, these programs should also provide training to develop skills to de-escalate
risky situations to prevent sexual violence and help community members to be effective allies for survivors.
In this regard, Bond’s ~1995! articulation of a framework for preventing workplace
harassment is instructive. Using the ecological model to map risk factors for sexual
harassment in the workplace, she highlights the need to move beyond a focus on
variables within individuals to “understand how the environment shapes and constrains behavior” ~p. 165!. She outlines the need for prevention efforts focused on
creating “empowering climates” ~p. 164!, which allocate resources and power such that
all members of the organization are supported. Bond describes such climates as
consisting not only of a set of policies and procedures prohibiting harassment, but
broader values that are embraced by the organization and that create a climate in
which harassment is unlikely to occur. Key components include “an ethic of caring
and responsibility . . . and increased contextual thinking” ~p. 165!. She goes on to
explain that a sense of caring comes about when individuals in an organization see
themselves as interconnected with others and when cooperation is encouraged and
valued. In this way, for example, women’s views of the impact of sexual harassment
can move to the center of discussions of harassment rather than more male views that
tend to focus on the intent of the perpetrator. Bond also stresses the need for promoting “contextual thinking” ~p. 167! to move away from an exclusive focus on individuals as it neglects appreciation of how contextual variables constrain or support
individual behaviors and choices. Organizational policies and values that promote
appreciation of context, she asserts, should help to reduce individual-blaming attitudes. Bond states ~1995!, “An empowering climate is one that adopts an ethos beyond
the dominant stories that support, hide, or deny sexual harassment. This process
involves creating new norms where it is clear to all that harassment is unacceptable.
An empowering climate needs to incorporate new stories based on caring, responsibility, and empathy. The new stories need to be less linear and incorporate an understanding of how context shapes behavior” ~p. 168!. Following from this, we outline
below a theoretical model for creating such new stories in the context of sexual
violence prevention curricula in communities such as college campuses.
THE ROLE OF THE BYSTANDER
The review of the literature above suggests the need for further developments in
sexual violence prevention. These efforts should continue to draw from theoretical
models in such fields as social and community psychology. Doing so will strengthen
the ability of prevention messages to overcome resistance and defensiveness of par-

Bystander Education

•

67

ticipants, decrease victim-blaming messages whether intentional or not, and find ways
to engage the broader community in tangible behaviors that promote a “rape-free
culture” ~Sanday, 1996!. To address such issues, previous work draws upon the social
psychology literature on persuasion ~e.g., Lonsway, 1996! and work on social norms
~e.g., Berkowitz, 2002, 2003!. Even so, another body of theoretical and empirical
literature that may be equally fruitful as a foundation for innovation in prevention
remains underutilized: the extensive literature on helping behavior and bystander
intervention. Below we provide a critical overview of this literature and the implications it may have as a theoretical model for a community approach to sexual violence
prevention with a focus on college campus communities as an example.
Factors that Impact Bystander Intervention
A number of studies on helping behavior and bystander intervention focus on aspects
of individuals and situations that promote or inhibit helping in emergencies ~see
Batson, 1998; Bar-Tal, 1976 for reviews!. Findings from this body of literature suggest
that larger groups often inhibit helping through what has been termed “diffusion of
responsibility” or the belief that someone else will step in to help ~e.g., Darley &
Latane, 1968; Morgan, 1978; see Myers, 1999 for a review!. Nevertheless, this process
is more complex than it initially appears. Other researchers note that more cohesive
groups who communicate and develop consensus around helping are more likely to
promote intervention ~e.g., Harada, 1985!. Harada states, “. . . if the degree of consensus to help is strong enough, people will be more helpful when in the presence of
others” ~1985, p. 178!. Likewise, having role models who help and witnessing others
provide help in other situations can facilitate intervention ~see Batson, 1998; Myers,
1999 for reviews!. In addition, perception of victim distress promotes intervention
~e.g., Yee & Greenberg, 1998!. Finally, some literature suggests that requests for help
make it easier for bystanders to take a more active role ~e.g., Shaffer, Rogel, &
Hendrick, 1975!. Additionally, models of community readiness to change suggest that
broader community norms may also play a role in facilitating bystander willingness to
intervene. Edwards et al. ~2000! discuss how efforts to change individual behaviors
cannot occur outside an analysis of the broader social context of attitudes that may
support or hinder such changes. Schwartz and DeKeseredy ~2000! highlight ways in
which peer norms promote sexual violence; further work is needed on community
variables that inhibit it ~e.g., Berkowitz, 2003!.
Research also shows that intervention and giving help are less likely in situations
where the perception of an emergency or need for help is ambiguous ~e.g., Harada,
1985!. Brickman et al. ~1982! discuss the importance of individual’s attributions for
both who is seen as culpable for the problem and who is viewed as responsible for the
solution. In situations where victims are seen as being to blame for their problems,
help is less likely to be forthcoming ~e.g., Brickman et al., 1982; Batson, 1998!. Researchers have also investigated factors such as the impact of the bystander’s mood, sense of
responsibility including nature of relationship to the person in need of help, locus of
control, or esteem-orientation ~see Dozier & Miceli, 1985 and Myers, 1999 for reviews;
Huston, Ruggiero, Conner, & Geis, 1981; Michelini, Wilson, & Messe, 1975; Tice &
Baumeister, 1985; Yee & Greenberg, 1998; Wispe, 1980!. Finally, some research suggests that skill level of bystanders is also important, with active bystanders more likely
to have had previous training in emergency intervention or a strong sense of their
own physical strength ~e.g., Huston et al., 1981!.

68

•

Journal of Community Psychology, January 2004

Yet another group of studies focuses in more detail on the decision-making process for bystanders. This process includes consideration of the potential costs to
bystanders of intervening or of not intervening, and the complex decision-making
process that individuals may use when trying to decide what they will do ~e.g., Dozier
& Miceli, 1985; Fritzsche, Finkelstein, & Penner, 2000; Shaleff & Shichor, 1980!. This
research suggests that bystander intervention and helping will be increased in situations where costs of intervening are reduced.
In addition, research shows that these more general findings are important to
understanding bystander intervention in the case of crime and interpersonal violence.
Shotland and Goodstein ~1984! argue that bystanders can help deter crime through
direct interventions, such as directly disrupting a crime in progress or indirectly by
reporting to the authorities. They also discussed the role bystanders’ presence can
play in creating an environment that increases criminals’ perceptions that committing
a crime in this particular situation would be highly risky. “There is evidence that the
mere presence of bystanders reduces crime and that criminals try to avoid being
observed while committing crimes” ~Shotland & Goodstein, 1984, p. 17!.
Bystander research is now being applied to the field of interpersonal violence.
Researchers describe bystanders in relation to child abuse, partner violence, and peer
bullying ~e.g., Christy & Voigt, 1994; Harari, Harari, & White, 1985; Laner, Benin, &
Ventrone, 2001; Shotland & Straw, 1976; Slaby & Stringham, 1994!. Other researchers
are making efforts to link this literature to sexual violence prevention ~e.g., Berkowitz,
2002; Foubert, 2000; Katz, 1994; Schwartz & DeKeseredy, 1997!. Fundamentally this
literature suggests that active bystander intervention in cases of interpersonal violence
is possible and often influenced by characteristics of the situation and the individual
bystander, consistent with the broader literature. Of particular interest in this research
is the finding that knowing that an abuser and victim are related seems to decrease a
bystander’s likelihood of intervening. This is of particular importance given the finding that persons who know the victim are often the perpetrators of interpersonal
violence such as sexual assault and domestic violence. In fact, more than 70% of rape
or sexual assault victims know their attackers, compared to about half of all violent
crime victims ~Rennison, 1999!.
A key component of bystander research is also its attention to skills. That is to say,
in a situation in which a person is being attacked, people who have the appropriate
capacity and beliefs will have an intention to intervene. Drawing from these models,
then, one may hypothesize that if bystanders are taught these skills and beliefs, they
may be more likely to intervene with regard to rape, attempted rape, sexual violence,
and intimate partner violence incidents on the college campus. Lanier et al. ~2001!,
for example, found that participant reports of experience dealing with fights was a
predictor of bystander intervention in a case of physical violence, although training in
things such as self-defense or lifesaving did not make significant contributions to
willingness to intervene. This finding suggests that training bystanders is important
but that this training needs to be specific to the type of situation in which they may
be called upon to act. According to Christy and Voigt ~1994!, an intervening bystander
is someone who feels personally responsible to stop the witnessed abuse. Their study
also shows that “intervening bystanders felt certain about how to intervene” ~p. 841!.
This is a key to the “if ” in bystander activity. People must know how to intervene and
what to expect. “The notion that certainty about how to respond to the demand
situation might be reason for bystander action was first implied in the results of a
Darley and Latane ~1968! study, where almost one third of the non-interveners reported

Bystander Education

•

69

that they did not know what to do in response to the victims call for help” ~Christy &
Voigt, 1994, p. 841!.
SUMMARY
Thus, the literature on helping and bystanders teaches us a number of things. To
maximize the likelihood that bystanders will engage in prosocial helping behavior,
they need to have an awareness of the problem and its negative impact on the victim.
They will be more likely to help if they are asked to make a commitment to help and
to see themselves as partially responsible for solving the problem. They also need to
view victims as not the cause of their own problems. Finally, bystanders need to feel
that they possess the skills to intervene and have the opportunity to view individuals
who model such behaviors. Building a repertoire of such skills will also help as
bystanders engage in costs0benefits analyses of helping so that they can assess situations to apply indirect as well as direct help and understand the consequences of
nonintervention. One important cost or benefit may be the extent to which intervention enhances or threatens the individual’s status in the group or community. This
reinforces the need for understanding a bystander approach within community levels
of intervention. We take up these issues in the following discussion.

PROMOTING BYSTANDER INTERVENTION
IN SEXUAL VIOLENCE PREVENTION
The research literature focuses much more on explaining and describing bystander
behavior than on developing effective interventions to promote it. Yet this broader
literature on understanding helping behavior and bystander intervention has potentially important links to sexual violence prevention efforts. Moreover, using the empirical and theoretical literature on “the bystander effect” may act as an important model
for sexual violence prevention. In addition to supporting and explaining key aspects
of sexual violence prevention that have already been identified and substantiated by
research, this model adds new components to programming. The model’s focus on
wider community audiences and its potential role in changing community norms
embeds it within ecological and feminist models of the causes of sexual violence
calling for broader community approaches that target both men and women and
move beyond individual levels of analysis ~e.g., Koss & Harvey, 1991!.
As a basis for prevention programming, a focus on bystanders has several positive
outcomes. It can help create new situational and community norms for intervention
to prevent sexual violence, provide role models of helping behavior, and build a
repertoire of specific skills for bystanders. In addition, it can create attitude change
that fosters a bystander’s sense of responsibility for intervening, sense of competence
for intervening, and an appropriate understanding of sexual violence to facilitate
identifying situations where intervention may be necessary. It may do this in the
context of a program message that does not implicitly or explicitly label participants
as victims or perpetrators but as potential witnesses, bystanders, or allies, thereby
decreasing defensiveness toward the prevention material and reducing potential victimblaming attitudes ~e.g., Katz, 1994!. Furthermore, such a focus holds the promise of
creating wider community change. If using a bystander model increases community

70

•

Journal of Community Psychology, January 2004

receptivity and support for intervening against sexual violence, it may reduce implicit
societal support for sexual violence over and above limited opportunities that individual community members may have to intervene. It may also create community
norms in support of community responsibility for prevention, increasing an overall
sense of community, and decreasing any threats to status that an individual may
perceive as a consequence of intervening in a risky situation. Additionally, it may also
build community supports to promote the safety of bystanders. Thus, such programs
may work to build a broader sense of community and help alter group and community norms to a greater extent than other programs. The bystander model gives all
community members a specific role, with which they can personally identify and adopt
in preventing the community problem of sexual violence. This role includes interrupting situations that could lead to assault before it happens or during an incident,
speaking out against social norms that support sexual violence, and having skills to be
an effective and supportive ally to survivors.
What is additionally important about this perspective is that it may also provide an
entry into broader community change. It does this through its potential for increased
receptivity to the prevention message, the way it provides roles for all community
members to play in prevention, and its link to “empowering climates” ~Bond, 1995,
p. 164!. If community members are more receptive to the sexual violence prevention
message by being able to view themselves not necessarily as perpetrators or victims,
several other prosocial outcomes may follow. That is, community members may also
be more likely to take in the sexual violence prevention message, increasing their
empathy for survivors and decreasing their tolerance for behaviors of other community members across the full continuum of harassing and violent behavior.
Furthermore, by presenting material about sexual violence in the context of discussions about sense of community and the interconnections between members of the
community, individual and groups may begin to take on broader challenges in creating social change around these issues. Altogether these changes may make shifts in
community norms about behavior more likely ~e.g., Berkowitz, 2003!. Dalton et al.
review research on effective or “competent communities” ~2001, p. 213!. Characteristics of these communities include environments where individuals have an impact on
one another and share a strong sense of community including, “the perception of
similarity to others, an acknowledged interdependence with others, a willingness to
maintain this interdependence by giving to or doing for others what one expects from
them . . . ” ~Sarason, 1974 cited in Dalton et al., 2001, p. 193!. A focus on bystander
intervention fits well within such a framework. It may be argued that a bystander
focused prevention message, with its emphasis on shared responsibility, will work to
foster such a sense of community and promote more competent communities around
the issue of sexual violence. This also fits with work by Bond ~1995! on empowering
organizational climates. Indeed, factors such as building an “ethic of caring and
responsibility” and “contextual thinking,” which she describes as critical components
of “empowering climates” ~Bond, 1995, p. 167! are also central assumptions of the
bystander model.
Moreover, the bystander message, with its central feature of community responsibility, may encourage participants to add their efforts to creating community levels
of change since the responsibility for action rests not only with potential perpetrators
or victims but with all members of the community. Indeed, a prosocial bystander
perspective provides all community members with a positive role to play in ending
sexual violence. This fits with discussions of the need for positive messages in preven-

Bystander Education

•

71

tion ~e.g., Berkowitz, 2002! and also with research on components of citizen action. As
noted above, Dalton et al. ~2001! reviewed the growing literature on citizen participation in social action and empowerment. They describe key components of what
motivates individuals to become active in social change movements in their community including a high sense of community and awareness and concern about community problems ~e.g., Chavis & Wandersman, 1990!. Again, a bystander prevention
approach teaches all community members about the problem of sexual violence, with
the intention of increasing concern about this issue, while also fostering a sense of
shared community responsibility for solving the problem. Similarly to Bond ~1995!,
Zimmerman ~1995! discusses the components of empowerment but in the context of
being an active citizen in one’s community. He describes the importance of critical
awareness of the problem, a condition also shown to be crucial in the bystander
literature and notes actual competencies and skills such as actively listening to others,
building coalitions with others, and planning specific strategies to create change
~Dalton et al., 2001 for a review!. All of these are components of a bystander model
that asks each person to take responsibility for the community problem of sexual
violence but also teaches skills to empower participants to be competent allies to
survivors and to work with others to de-escalate risky situations.
Furthermore, a bystander approach integrates favorably with findings from sexual
violence prevention literature about what we already know works. Strong messages
that challenge sexual violence myths make community members more aware of sexual
violence, its prevalence, and consequences. This message, along with programs that
promote empathy for sexual violence victims, will also decrease the ambiguity in
situations where risk for sexual violence is high, an important component of bystander
behavior discussed in the empirical literature reviewed earlier. Previous research on
the effectiveness of sexual violence prevention programs that include these elements
suggest that they will be effective as components of bystander-focused programs as
well. Indeed, this focus includes both the “citizen inoculation” and “environmental
action” components that Koss and Harvey ~1991! identify as key aspects of sexual
violence prevention from a community perspective. This focus is also in keeping with
an empowerment model that moves beyond a “deficit-oriented” approach, which
instills fear in potential victims, to a focus on building competence ~Koss & Harvey,
1991, pp. 257–259!.
But a bystander focus also goes beyond traditional programs. In particular, bystanders are asked to make a commitment to intervene. This is achieved through role
modeling by group leaders and discussing examples of bystanders in the wider community and society, and by demonstrating ways in which bystanders can play an active
role in sexual violence prevention beyond not becoming a perpetrator or victim.
Using the bystander literature as a focus of prevention programs will also provide
skill-building opportunities for both direct and indirect intervention, to increase helping behavior without placing bystanders’ own safety in jeopardy. Finally, a bystander
approach can work within broader community models of change by providing a
perspective that shows how all community members have a direct stake and role to
play in sexual violence prevention, including community attitude change. Even so,
previous discussions that note bystanders in relation to sexual violence prevention
have tended to focus exclusively on the utility of this approach for men ~e.g., Berkowitz, 2002; Foubert, 2000; DeKeseredy, Schwartz, & Alvi, 2000! or have tended to
embed that discussion within more individual models of change ~e.g., Berkowitz,
2002!. It also seems clear from a review of the broader helping and bystander litera-

72

•

Journal of Community Psychology, January 2004

ture that such an approach has more broad and important applicability to improving
sexual violence prevention for both men and women and among a wider range of
community members. On a college campus, for example, it would include students,
staff, faculty, and administrators.

Using Bystander Research as the Basis for Prevention:
Case Examples
Several authors discuss programs designed to increase bystander intervention related
to crime. Descriptions of these programs, however, are relatively few in number, so
broad conclusions based on their efficacy are difficult to assess at present. Bickman
~1975! evaluated the use of a media campaign to increase bystander intervention in
relation to crime on a college campus. The results were mixed: Changes in attitudes
toward helping were shown; changes in behavior were not. Bickman ~1984! also
reviewed a variety of community projects such as neighborhood watch programs that
aim to increase bystanders’ intervention and reporting of crime. Most of these programs, however, were not evaluated and so determining their efficacy is difficult.
Kalafat, Elias, and Gara ~1993! applied research on bystander intervention to the
prevention of adolescent suicide. They discuss their research in the context of calls to
shift from prevention focused on teens as suicide victims to a focus on teens as
rescuers. Thus, they focus on the combination of bystander factors including bystanders’ views of social norms, diffusion of responsibility that can occur when there are
multiple bystanders, and the ambiguity in the mind of the bystander about whether
there is a need for action. Kalafat et al. ~1993! found that these factors identified in
the bystander literature were indeed predictive of whether or not teens indicated that
they would intervene by telling an adult about a suicidal peer and they discuss the
importance of these findings for developing prevention programs that focus on teaching teens how to take action.
Recent examples of applications of a bystander approach to violence prevention
are also available. Slaby and Stringham ~1994! encourage a focus on bystander roles as
part of comprehensive violence prevention efforts. However, the specifics of this
approach are not elaborated and most of their discussion is devoted to skills to avoid
victimization. Katz’s ~1994! Mentors in Violence Prevention ~MVP! program at Northeastern University encourages prosocial bystanding and is one example in the literature of a more developed program. This program uses athletic metaphors and works
to encourage trained community leaders to intervene in a variety of situations where
racism, sexism, and gendered violence may be occurring. In addition to including the
staples of rape prevention curricula more generally—that is, exercises to build victim
empathy and presentation of information about gendered violence—the multi-session
program also includes such things as discussion of scenarios where a bystander might
need to intervene, ~e.g., when a teammate discloses that they have been physically
assaulted by an intimate partner!. Though discussion of this program does not appear
in the published literature, initial internal evaluation of this program has shown some
effectiveness in terms of changing individual attitudes of groups such as high-schoolaged male and female participants ~Ward, 2001!.
DeKeseredy and colleagues ~2000! highlight ways in which “profeminist” men can
play a role in ending violence against women and provide case studies to illustrate
their points. They describe a number of activities in which men on campus engage to

Bystander Education

•

73

end violence including protesting against stores that carry pornography, participating
in awareness programs, attending classes or lectures to actively pursue information on
women’s issues, and being members of collective anti-violence campaigns. Their work
is not a description of an organized sexual violence prevention program but summarizes activities in which men on the campuses they have studied spontaneously participated. In another application of the bystander approach, Berkowitz ~2002! summarizes
key elements of how his bystander stages of intervention can become an important
component of sexual violence prevention that targets men, but he does not offer a
description of a specific program or research to support it.
Foubert ~2000! and Foubert and Marriott ~1997! have empirically demonstrated
the effectiveness of engaging men in sexual violence prevention through messages
focusing on how to help a sexual violence survivor. They describe and experimentally
evaluated a one-hour program to boost men’s empathy for survivors in the aftermath
of rape that features a video of a male victim. The program then moves to a discussion
of specific strategies for helping a rape survivor recover. Yet other avenues of bystander
intervention remain to be explored; although most programs present bystanders as
helpful allies to survivors after an incident of sexual violence, they do not go on to
teach how bystanders may also play roles in risky situations with friends, acquaintances, or strangers before an incident occurs. Furthermore, a more complete understanding of the impact of such an approach on both men and women is needed.
Seeking to address some of the previous limitations, we have created our own
version of a bystander intervention program. We have developed both a single and
multi-session program for single sex groups of men and women. We describe the
longer of the programs below, though the single session is an abbreviated version of
the multi-session one.
Each component of the program is based on the empirical literature on bystander
behavior. As mentioned previously, research has identified the following predictors of
successful bystander intervention: group size, recognizing a situation as a problem,
being asked to intervene, witnessing interventions by role models and possessing skills
to intervene. For purposes of our prevention program, we have incorporated those
predictors that we can reinforce through education: recognizing inappropriate behavior, skill building, requesting a commitment to intervene, and role modeling. Consistent with recommendations found in the general prevention literature, the program
includes educational, motivational, and skill-building components. Participants begin
with discussions of their definitions of community and the importance of an ecological approach to social problems and the role of sense of community. Throughout the
program, the facilitators ~a woman and man working as a team! serve as role models.
In the first session, we designed the program to introduce students gradually to
the notion of bystander responsibility, examine issues relating community membership, and ask them to draw upon their own experiences ~e.g., when they witnessed an
intervention or intervened to help someone!. Examples are not limited to sexual
violence, but open to all types of helping behaviors. To initiate this discussion, facilitators offer local, regional, and national examples of both successful and unsuccessful
interventions. We have found that examples that have occurred on our own campus
are particularly effective.
We designed the second session of the program to increase awareness of sexual
violence and give students an opportunity to apply bystander responsibility to sexual
violence. We incorporate an exercise to build victim empathy through visualization
and include knowledge about the scope and causes of sexual violence that are grounded

74

•

Journal of Community Psychology, January 2004

in statistics, research, and needs assessments conducted in the community in which
the prevention program is taking place. This includes, for example, statistics about the
number of sexual assaults reported to the local campus rape crisis center, case studies
of rapes on the local campus where bystanders had multiple opportunities to intervene but chose to do nothing, and a recent local community study of sexual violence
on campus, ~Banyard et al., 2000!. We also use interactive exercises to model and teach
skills about how to be an active bystander at all points on the sexual violence continuum—
before sexual violence occurs ~e.g., hearing sexist comments in community!, during a
risky situation ~e.g., at a party where one observes physical conflict between partners
or sees an overly intoxicated person being taken upstairs by a group of others!, and
afterward ~e.g., friend discloses about abuse!. These and similar scenarios can include
both situations where a community member might have the opportunity to de-escalate
a risky situation and prevent sexual violence or interrupt its occurrence but also
include opportunities for community members to support survivors after an incident
of sexual violence has occurred. Using the example of a college campus, scenarios
might include walking a friend home from a party, talking to a dorm counselor or
advisor, contacting the rape crisis center on behalf of a friend who asks for information or help, or refusing to keep silent about information about an incident of sexual
violence.
Finally, we put together the third session to increase awareness among participants
about the importance of personal safety, resources available to aid them during intervention, and understanding the decision-making process behind successful bystander
intervention. The participants explore individual strategies that reflect the appropriate level of intervention needed for the inappropriate behavior. Facilitators role-play,
give the participants scenarios, and then ask them to practice intervention strategies
and share their observations with others. Skill building is achieved through group
discussion and role-playing of scenarios designed to highlight bystander options. The
program emphasizes understanding appropriate levels of intervention, being mindful
of personal safety, and different personal options bystanders may employ depending
on the nature of the situation. Students receive information about campus resources
that they can use to support their role as an active bystander ~e.g., the campus crisis
center can help a friend who may disclose about being a victim of sexual assault!.
Here, facilitators who may have experience with successful interventions serve as role
models for expected behaviors.
Consistent with the bystander literature, peer group leaders role model appropriate behavior and participants become knowledgeable about factors that help and
hinder bystanders. Participants are asked to sign a pledge and make a commitment to
actively intervene. They also discuss in great detail the pros and cons of intervention
including how to keep themselves safe as an active bystander. Using an experimental
design, we are in the process of empirically evaluating this program with men and
women. This is but one more example of how a bystander approach may be operationalized in sexual violence prevention.
CONCLUSION
Given the importance of sexual violence prevention across an array of communities,
the need continues for both innovative and carefully evaluated studies grounded in
developed theory ~e.g., Lonsway, 1996; Yeater & O’Donohue, 1999!. The mobilization
of prosocial behavior on the part of bystanders stands out as a potentially feasible

Bystander Education

•

75

model for presenting programs aimed at preventing sexual violence and intervening
to help victims of sexual violence. This model is embedded in calls for prevention
efforts that take a wider community approach rather than simply targeting individuals
as likely perpetrators or victims. As noted above, this model has several other features
that lead us to regard it as a strong candidate for developing and evaluating sexual
violence prevention programs. The foregoing review of literature on community readiness to change and research on bystander behavior in emergency and crime situations
provide a conceptually compelling case for moving forward with such efforts in sexual
violence prevention. What is more, the model fits well with emerging discussions in
the field of the applicability of social norms theory to violence prevention ~e.g.,
Berkowitz, 2002, 2003! and notions of the development of “profeminist masculinity”
in the service of prevention violence against women ~DeKeseredy et al., 2000!.
In sum, this model is differentiated from others in that sexual violence prevention
is conceptualized in a broader community context, in its potential to overcome resistance and defensiveness of participants in sexual violence prevention programs, and
its movement away from victim-blaming messages—whether these messages are intended
or unintentional. Furthermore, this approach is seen as having the ability to make all
community members more aware of sexual violence, its prevalence and consequences.
In addition, it gives them strong messages that challenge sexual violence myths and
promotes empathy for sexual violence victims regardless of whether the victim is a
friend, acquaintance, or stranger. It imparts skills for decreasing the ambiguity in
situations where the risk for sexual violence is high either before or during an incident of abuse, as well as skills for being an effective ally to sexual violence survivors.
This approach includes a message that is adapted for primary prevention in that
everyone in the community can have a role to play. It moves the focus away from just
those most at risk for becoming victims or perpetrators. Thus, the impact of the
program may readily extend to changing the broader group and community norms.
The predictable outcome is that it will teach all community members to identify
themselves as prosocial bystanders who have a role to play in supporting victims or
interrupting potential sexual violence.
While a number of programs have begun to focus on program development in
this area ~e.g., Foubert, 2000; Katz, 1994!, much work remains to be done. Many
programs have not been rigorously evaluated using experimental designs or have been
evaluated only with samples of men. Outcome measures have focused mainly on
attitude change and behavioral intent rather than actual behaviors. The impact of
bystander intervention on the prevalence of sexual violence in communities remains
to be assessed. Furthermore, most programs are multifaceted and studies are needed
of which program elements are key to observed outcome effects. Community psychologists are uniquely positioned to contribute to this endeavor. Their knowledge of the
broader context of community readiness to change may inform the design of more
developmentally based or incremental programs built on careful needs assessments of
different community contexts. Their knowledge of broader tools for community change
can inform program design while their skills in evaluation research can help to assess
a broader array of individual, group, and community outcomes at all levels of the
ecological model. To date, most outcome measures have focused on individual attitudes and behaviors. Community psychologists can add consideration of these programs’ impact on variables such as sense of community, citizen participation in
community change, and the like. We are hopeful that the concepts presented here
and the future evaluation of our program further contribute to this effort.

76

•

Journal of Community Psychology, January 2004

REFERENCES
Abbey, A., McAuslan, P., & Ross, L.T. ~1998!. Sexual assault perpetration by college men: The
role of alcohol, misperception of sexual intent, and sexual beliefs and experiences. Journal
of Social and Clinical Psychology, 17, 167–195.
Abbey, A., Ross, L.T., & McDuffie, D. ~1996!. Alcohol and dating risk factors for sexual assault
among college women. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 20, 147–169.
Acierno, R., Brady, K., Gray, M., Kilpatrick, D., Resnick, H., & Best, C.L. ~2002!. Psychopathology following interpersonal violence: A comparison of risk factors in older and younger
adults. Journal of Clinical Geropsychology, 8, 13–23.
Arata, C.M., & Burkhart, B.R. ~1996!. Post-traumatic stress disorder among college student
victims of acquaintance assault. Journal of Psychology and Human Sexuality, 8, 79–92.
Banyard, V.L., Plante, E., Ward, S., Cohn, E.S., Moorhead, C., & Walsh, W. ~2000!. Revisiting our
understanding of unwanted sexual experiences on campus: A comparison of 1988 and
2000. Unpublished manuscript, University of New Hampshire.
Banyard, V.L., Williams, L.M., & Siegel, J.A. ~2001!. The long-term mental health consequences
of child sexual abuse: An exploratory study of the impact of multiple traumas in a sample
of women. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 14, 697–715.
Bar-Tal, D. ~1976!. Altruistic behavior in emergency situations. In D. Bar-Tal ~Ed.!, Prosocial
behavior ~pp. 85–109!. Washington, DC: Hemisphere Publishing.
Batson, C.D. ~1998!. Altruism and prosocial behavior. In D.T. Gilbert, S.T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey
~Eds.!, The handbook of social psychology II ~pp. 282–316!. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Berkowitz, A.D. ~2002!. Fostering men’s responsibility for preventing sexual assault. In P.A.
Schewe ~Ed.!, Preventing violence in relationships: Interventions across the lifespan ~pp. 163–
196!. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Berkowitz, A.D. ~2003!. Applications of social norms theory to other health and social justice
issues. In W. Perkins ~Ed.!, The social norms approach to preventing school and college age
substance abuse: A handbook for educators, counselors, and clinicians ~pp. 259–279!. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bickman, L. ~1984!. Bystander intervention in crimes: Research and application. In E. Staub,
D. Bar-Tal, J. Karylowski, & J. Reykowski ~Eds.!, Development and maintenance of prosocial
behavior ~pp. 457– 470!. New York: Plenum Press.
Bickman, L. ~1975!. Bystander intervention in a crime: The effect of a mass-media campaign.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 5, 296 –302.
Bond, M.A. ~1995!. Prevention and the ecology of sexual harassment: Creating empowering
climates. In C.F. Swift ~Ed.!, Sexual assault and abuse: Sociocultural context of prevention
~pp. 147–173!. New York: Haworth Press.
Breitenbecher, K.H. ~2000!. Sexual assault on college campuses: Is an ounce of prevention
enough? Applied and Preventive Psychology, 9, 23– 52.
Brener, N.D., McMahon, P.M., Warren, C.W., & Douglas, K.A. ~1999!. Forced sexual intercourse
and associated health-risk behaviors among female college students in the United States.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 252–259.
Brickman, P., Rabinowitz, V.C., Karuza, J., Jr., Coates, D., Cohn, E., & Kidder, L. ~1982!. Models
of helping and coping. American Psychologist, 37, 363–384.
Bronfenbrenner, U. ~1980!. Ecology of childhood. School Psychology Review, 9, 294 –297.
Brownmiller, S. ~1975!. Against our will: Men, women, and rape. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Campbell, J., & Soeken, K.L. ~1999!. Forced sex and intimate partner violence: Effects on
women’s risk and women’s health. Violence Against Women, 5, 1017–1035.
Chavis, D.M., & Wandersman, A. ~1990!. Sense of community in the urban environment: A

Bystander Education

•

77

catalyst for participation and community development. American Journal of Community
Psychology, 18, 83–116.
Christy, C.A., & Voigt, H. ~1994!. Bystander responses to public episodes of child abuse. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 24, 824 –847.
Dalton, J.H., Elias, M.J., & Wandersman, A. ~2001!. Community psychology: Linking individuals
and communities. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Thomson Learning.
Darley, J.M., & Latane, B. ~1968!. Bystander intervention in emergencies: Diffusion of responsibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8, 377–383.
DeKeseredy, W.S., Schwartz, M.D., & Alvi, S. ~2000!. The role of profeminist men in dealing with
women on the Canadian college campus. Violence Against Women, 6, 918–935.
Dozier, J.B., & Miceli, M.P. ~1985!. Potential predictors of whistle-blowing: A prosocial behavior
perspective. Academy of Management Review, 10, 823–836.
Edwards, R.W., Jumper-Thurman, P., Plested, B.A., Oetting, E.R., & Swanson, L. ~2000!. Community readiness: Research to practice. Journal of Community Psychology, 28, 291–307.
Fisher, B.S., Cullen, F.T., & Turner, M.G. ~2000!. The sexual victimization of college women:
Findings from two national-level studies. Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice and
Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Foubert, J.D. ~2000!. The longitudinal effects of a rape-prevention program on fraternity
men’s attitudes, behavioral intent, and behavior. Journal of American College Health, 48,
158–163.
Foubert, J.D., & Marriott, K.A. ~1997!. Effects of a sexual assault peer education program on
men’s beliefs in rape myths. Sex Roles, 36, 259–268.
Fritzsche, B.A., Finkelstein, M.A., & Penner, L.A. ~2000!. To help or not to help: Capturing
individuals’ decision policies. Social Behavior and Personality, 28, 561– 578.
Grimley, D., Prochaska, J.O., Velicer, W.F., Blais, L.M., & DiClemente, C.C. ~1994!. The transtheoretical model of change. In T.M. Brinthaupt & R.P. Lipka ~Eds.!, Changing the self:
Philosophies, techniques, and experiences ~pp. 201–227!. Albany, N Y: State University of
New York Press.
Harada, J. ~1985!. Bystander intervention: The effect of ambiguity of the helping situation and
the interpersonal relationship between bystanders. Japanese Psychological Research, 27,
177–184.
Harari, H., Harari, O., & White, R.V. ~1985!. The reaction to rape by American male bystanders.
The Journal of Social Psychology, 125, 653– 658.
Heppner, M.J., Humphrey, C.F., Hillenbrand-Gunn, T.L., & Debord, K.A. ~1995!. The differential effects of rape prevention programming on attitudes, behavior, and knowledge. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 42, 508– 518.
Heppner, M.J., Neville, H.A., Smith, K., Kivlighan, D.M., & Gershuny, B.S. ~1999!. Examining
immediate and long-term efficacy of rape prevention programming with racially diverse
college men. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 46, 16 –26.
Himelein, M.J. ~1995!. Risk factors for sexual victimization in dating: A longitudinal study of
college women. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 19, 31– 48.
Huston, T.L., Ruggiero, M., Conne, R., & Geis, G. ~1981!. Bystander intervention into a crime:
A study based on naturally-occurring episodes. Social Psychology Quarterly, 44, 14 –23.
Kalafat, J., Elias, M., & Gara, M.A. ~1993!. The relationship of bystander intervention variables
to adolescents’ responses the suicidal peers. The Journal of Primary Prevention, 13,
231–244.
Katz, J. ~1994!. Mentors in Violence Prevention ~MVP! Trainer’s Guide. Northeastern University’s Center for the Study of Sport in Society. Boston: Northeastern University.
Koss, M.P., & Dinero, T.E. ~1989!. Discriminant analysis of risk factors for sexual victimization

78

•

Journal of Community Psychology, January 2004

among a national sample of college women. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
57, 242–250.
Koss, M.P., Gidcyz, C.A., & Wisniewski, N. ~1987!. The scope of rape: Incidence and prevalence
of sexual aggression and victimization in a national sample of higher education students.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 55, 162–170.
Koss, M.P., Goodman, L.A., Browne, A., Fitzgerald, L.E., Keita, G.P., & Russo, N.F. ~1994!. No
safe haven: Male violence against women at home, at work and in the community. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Koss, M.P., & Harvey, M.R. ~1991!. The rape victim: Clinical and community interventions.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Laner, M.R., Benin, M.H., & Ventrone, N.A. ~2001!. Bystander attitudes towards victims of
violence who’s worth helping? Deviant Behavior: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 22, 23– 42.
Lanier, C. ~2001!. Rape accepting attitudes. Violence Against Women, 7, 876 –885.
Larimer, M.E., Lydum, A.R., Anderson, B.K., & Turner, A.P. ~1999!. Male and female recipients
of unwanted sexual contact in a college student sample: Prevalence rates, alcohol use, and
depression symptoms. Sex Roles, 40, 295–308.
Lonsway, K.A. ~1996!. Preventing acquaintance rape through education: What do we know?
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 20, 229–265.
Michelini, R.L., Wilson, J.P., & Messe, L.A. ~1975!. The influence of psychological needs on
helping behavior. The Journal of Psychology, 91, 253–258.
Morgan, C.J. ~1978!. Bystander intervention: Experimental test of a formal model. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 43– 55.
Myers, D.G. ~1999!. Social psychology ~6th ed.!. Boston: McGraw Hill.
Nagayama, G.C., & Barongan, C. ~1997!. Prevention of sexual aggression. American Psychologist, 52, 5–14.
Oetting, E.R., Donnermeyer, J.F., Plested, B.A., Edwards, R.W., Kelly, K., & Beauvais, F. ~1995!.
Assessing community readiness for prevention. The International Journal of the Addictions, 30, 659– 683.
Plested, B., Smitham, D.M., Jumper-Thurman, P., Oetting, E.R., & Edwards, R.W. ~1999!. Readiness for drug use prevention in rural minority communities. Substance Use and Misuse, 34,
521– 544.
Potter, R.H., Krider, J.E., & McMahon, P.M. ~2000!. Examining elements of campus sexual
violence policies. Violence Against Women, 6, 1345–1362.
Rafter, N.H., & Stanko, E.A. ~Eds.!. ~1982!. Judge, lawyer, victim, thief: Women, gender roles,
and criminal justice. Boston: Northeastern University.
Rennison, C.M. ~1999!. Criminal victimization, 1998; Changes 1997–98 with trends 1993–98.
Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice.
Sanday, P. ~1981!. The socio-cultural context of rape: A cross-cultural study. Journal of Social
Issues, 37, 5–27.
Sanday, P.R. ~1996!. Rape-prone versus rape-free campus cultures. Violence Against Women, 2,
191–208.
Sarason, S.B. ~1974!. The psychological sense of community: Prospects for a community psychology. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Schewe, P.A. ~Ed.! ~2002!. Prevention violence in relationships: Interventions across the lifespan.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Schewe, P.A., & O’Donohue, W. ~1993!. Rape prevention: Methodological problems and new
directions. Clinical Psychology Review, 13, 667– 682.
Schwartz, M.D., & DeKeseredy, W.S. ~1997!. Sexual assault on the college campus: The role of
male peer support. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Bystander Education

•

79

Schwartz, M.D., & DeKeseredy, W.S. ~2000!. Aggregation bias and woman abuse: Variations by
male peer support, region, language, and school type. Journal of Interpersonal Violence,
15, 555– 565.
Schwartz, M.D., & Nogrady, C.A. ~1996!. Fraternity membership, rape myths, and sexual aggression on a college campus. Violence Against Women, 2, 148–162.
Shaffer, D.R., Rogel, M., & Hendrick, C. ~1975!. Intervention in the library: The effect of
increased responsibility on bystanders’ willingness to prevent theft. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 5, 303–319.
Shaleff, L.S., & Shichor, D. ~1980!. Victimological aspects of bystander involvement. Crime and
Delinquency, 26, 193–202.
Shotland, R.L., & Goodstein, L.I. ~1984!. The role of bystanders in crime control. Journal of
Social Issues, 40, 9–26.
Shotland, R.L., & Straw, M.K. ~1976!. Bystander response to an assault: When a man attacks a
woman. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 990–999.
Slaby, R.G., & Stringham, P. ~1994!. Prevention of peer and community violence: The pediatrician’s role. Pediatrics, 94, 608– 616.
Stanko, E.A. ~1985!. Intimate intrusions: Women’s experience of male violence. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Stanko, E.A. ~1990!. Everyday violence: How women and men experience sexual and physical
danger. London: Pandora.
Stanko, E.A. ~1995!. Review of No safe haven: Male violence against women at home, at work,
and in the community by Koss et al. ~1994!. Violence Against Women, 1, 102–105.
Staub, E. ~1993!. The psychology of bystanders, perpetrators, and heroic helpers. International
Journal of Intercultural Relations, 17, 315–341.
Swift, C.F., & Ryan-Finn, K. ~1995!. Perpetrator prevention: Stopping the development of sexually abusive behavior. In C.F. Swift ~Ed.!, Sexual assault and abuse: Sociocultural context of
prevention ~pp. 13– 44!. New York: Haworth Press.
Synovitz, L.B., & Byrne, T.J. ~1998!. Antecedents of sexual victimization: Factors discriminating
victims from nonvictims. Journal of American College Health, 46, 151–158.
Tice, D.M., & Baumeister, R.F. ~1985!. Masculinity inhibits helping in emergencies: Personality
does predict the bystander effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 420– 428.
US Department of Justice. ~1996!. National Crime Victimization Survey, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Retrieved July 24, 2003, from http:00www.mv.com0ipusers0nhcadsv0nhcframes.html
Ward, K.J. ~2001!. Mentors in Violence Prevention Program Evaluation 1999–2000. Unpublished report, Northeastern University, Boston.
Wispe, L. ~1980!. The role of moods in helping behavior. Representative Research in Social
Psychology, 11, 2–15.
Yeater, E.A., & O’Donohue, W. ~1999!. Sexual assault prevention programs: Current issues,
future directions, and the potential efficacy of interventions with women. Clinical Psychology Review, 19, 739–771.
Yee, J.L., & Greenberg, M.S. ~1998!. Reactions to crime victims: Effects of victims’ emotional
state and type of relationship. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 17, 209–226.
Yllo, K. ~1993!. Through a feminist lens: Gender, power, and violence. In R.J. Gelles & D. Loseke
~Eds.!, Current controversies on family violence ~pp. 47– 62!. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Yodanis, C., Godenzi, A., & Stanko, E. ~2000!. The benefits of studying costs: A review and
agenda for studies on the economic costs of violence against women. Policy Studies, 21,
263–276.
Zimmerman, M.A. ~1995!. Psychological empowerment: Issues and illustrations. American Journal of Community Psychology, 23, 581– 600.

