University of Southern Maine

USM Digital Commons
School of Social Work

7-2008

Comparing the Impact of Bullying and Sexual
Harassment Victimization on the Mental and
Physical Health of Adolescents
James Gruber
University of Michigan - Dearborn

Susan Fineran
University of Southern Maine, sfineran@maine.edu

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.usm.maine.edu/swo
Part of the Gender and Sexuality Commons, Social Psychology and Interaction Commons, and
the Social Work Commons
Recommended Citation
Gruber, J., & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical
Health of Adolescents. Sex Roles, 59(1/2), 1-13.

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by USM Digital Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in School of Social Work by an
authorized administrator of USM Digital Commons. For more information, please contact jessica.c.hovey@maine.edu.

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.

Comparing the Impact of Bullying and Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and
Physical Health of Adolescents

James Gruber

Susan Fineran

James E. Gruber, Ph.D. is Professor, University of Michigan at Dearborn, Sociology
Department. Susan Fineran, Ph.D. is Associate Professor, University of Southern Maine School
of Social Work. Address correspondence to James E. Gruber, Ph.D., University of Michigan Dearborn, Behavioral Sciences Dept., 4012 CASL Building, 4901 Evergreen Road, Dearborn,
MI 48128.Telephone: 313-593-5611 [e-mail: jegruber@umich.edu

Header: ADOLESCENT SEXUAL HARASSMENT AND BULLYING

1

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.

Abstract
A sample of 522 middle and high school students from a school district in a northeastern state in
the U.S. was used to address two questions about bullying and sexual harassment: Is one more
frequent than the other, and are there gender or sexual orientation differences in this regard?
And, does one have greater adverse health effects than the other, and, if so, for whom? Bullying
occurred more frequently than sexual harassment for both girls and boys but not among sexual
minorities. Girls were bullied or harassed as frequently as boys, but sexual minorities
experienced higher levels of both. Compared to bullying, sexual harassment had adverse effects
on more health outcomes. These adverse effects were especially notable among girls and sexual
minorities.

Keywords: Sexual harassment; bullying; adolescents; health; gender differences

2

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.

This paper draws comparisons between school bullying and sexual harassment on two
fronts. First, we study the incidence of each in a sample of over five hundred American middle
and high school students. We ask: Which (bullying or harassment) is the more common
experience? And, does one occur more frequently for some students (e.g., boys) than for others
(e.g., girls and sexual minorities)? Second, we contrast the impact of each type of victimization
on five health outcomes (self esteem, mental and physical health, trauma symptoms, and
substance abuse). We ask: Is one type of victimization more harmful than the other? And, do
the negative health outcomes of bullying and sexual harassment differ among boys, girls, and
sexual minorities? At first glance, these analyses might seem straightforward and unremarkable
given the large volume of research on school bullying and sexual harassment that has been
published in the United States and Europe over the last decade. In reality, such comparisons
have been and remain problematic for reasons both theoretical and methodological. And the
need for a study of this kind has become more urgent because of the scholarly and public
popularity of one topic over the other. Not only is attention to school sexual harassment waning
but it is in danger of being subsumed under the rubric of bullying, namely, “sexual bullying,”
thereby obscuring the pernicious effects of gender and sexual stereotypes. As we will show
later, our paper is unique in two respects. First, we directly compare bullying and sexual
harassment. Only a handful of studies include measures of both types of victimization. Second,

3

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
our measures of bullying and sexual harassment use the same formats (i.e., structure of questions
and response categories, time frames), which, to the best of our knowledge, is without precedent.
School bullying and sexual harassment prevention programs have been competing for
resources and media attention for more than a decade. In the aftermath of Columbine-type school
shootings, many educators have embraced zero tolerance policies to stem school violence (Stein,
2003). Identifying school violence and safety as primary concerns has contributed to the creation
of a link between safe schools and bullying prevention, which, unfortunately, has diminished
attention to the harms of sexual harassment. The growing emphasis on bullying is best
illustrated by an online literature search which reveals that the volume of studies, papers and
prevention programs addressing bullying far exceeds that on sexual harassment. Moreover,
sexual harassment is currently viewed by some researchers as a subset or variation of bullying
rather than as a distinct phenomenon sui generis. As a result, educators and social researchers
today are in the difficult position of trying to understand two frequently occurring problems in
school without being able to accurately compare the incidence and impact of each. Different
avenues of research—one on bullying, the other on sexual harassment—suggest that they may
share some similar impacts: anxiety, depression, low self esteem, loneliness, and feeling afraid
(e.g., Nansel, Overpeck, Pilla, Ruan, Scheidt, & Simons-Morton, 2001; American Association of
University Women [AAUW], 1993, 2001). In actuality, it is difficult to compare them directly.
Background of Two Paradigms
Studies of bullying and sexual harassment have two different historical and theoretical
roots. The problem of bullying was brought to international attention most prominently by
Olweus, a Norwegian researcher in the 1970’s. Nansel et al. (2001) have recently defined

4

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
bullying in a manner that reflects the perspective developed and subsequently modified over the
years by Olweus: “a specific type of aggression in which (1) the behavior is intended to harm or
disturb, (2) the behavior occurs repeatedly over time, and (3) there is an imbalance of power,
with a more powerful person or group attacking a less powerful one. This asymmetry of power
may be physical or psychological, and the aggressive behavior may be verbal (e.g. name calling,
threats), physical (e.g. hitting), or psychological (e.g. rumors, shunning/exclusion)" (p.2094).
School bullies have been described as children who use physical or relational aggression in a
systematic and calculated way with a group of weaker peers (Crick, 1996; Olweus, 1993;
Pellegrini, 2001; Schwartz, Dodge, Pettit, & Bates, 1997).
Theories and definitions of sexual harassment originated in the United States in the
1970’s beginning with the work of MacKinnon, who defined it as a form of sex discrimination
used by men to subordinate women (1979). While bullying has often been characterized as
inappropriate or aggressive interpersonal behavior (between individuals or between a group and
an individual (‘mobbing’), sexual harassment was originally formulated as behavior by males
who used organizational power or cultural privilege to coerce sexual favors from women (quid
quo pro). This initial formulation has expanded both theoretically and legally over the decades to
include gender- or sexually-focused behaviors by men that make it exceedingly difficult for
women to work (hostile environment), and more recently, same-sex harassment involving the use
of sexual threats, taunts, or attacks (e.g., Oncale v. Sundowners, 1998). The definition of sexual
harassment by the U.S Department of Education parallels that of other state and local
governments and government agencies insofar as it includes both unwelcome interpersonal

5

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
behavior (e.g., date pressures, sexual contact) “that is sufficiently severe, persistent, or
pervasive…” and hostile environment (U.S. Department of Education 1997, p. 12038).
The primary distinction between bullying and sexual harassment is not simply that the
latter is about gender and sexuality. Rather, sexual harassment is more directly and clearly
related to hegemonic masculinity and therefore taps into potent structural and culturallysanctioned roles and meanings (masculine-feminine, heterosexual-homosexual) that are central
components of social stratification. In contrast, research and theory on bullying tends to focus on
the personal or psychological characteristics of bullies (e.g., severe adjustment problems),
situational factors that prompt bullying or the reciprocity of bullying behaviors (a number of
adolescents are characterized as “bully/victims”). One of the strengths of sexual harassment
theory is that it prioritizes gender- and sexually-based experiences as key factors in stabilizing
differences in power and privilege. Specifically, some people (females and sexual minorities)
experience greater victimization and more harm (physical, psychological, and emotional) than
others because of gender and sexual stereotypes. The term "sexual bullying" has surfaced
recently and has muddled the definition of both sexual harassment and bullying. Some
researchers (Craig et al., 2001; Pellegrini, 2001) view school sexual harassment as an adolescent
form of bullying. This is an unfortunate development for two reasons. First of all, bullying is not
illegal but sexual harassment is. Consequently, many students and their parents who perceive
sexual harassment as a form of bullying may not exercise their rights to have schools address the
issue as they are legally mandated to do. Also, when sexually-based experiences are viewed as
bullying and not identified specifically as sexual harassment, problems of victimization that
stem from gender or sexuality may be interpreted as private or interpersonal troubles experienced

6

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
by unfortunate students who are caught up in difficult situations. The fact that most bullies are
male, that girls experience more harm than boys from sexual harassment, and that homophobic
comments are used routinely (mostly by boys) to humiliate and control others (primarily other
boys) loses it critical edge (AAUW, 2001; McGuffey & Rich, 1999; Kimmel & Mahler, 2003).
Two recent studies by Jessie Klein (2006a, 2006b) have highlighted the role that gender and
sexual stereotyping played in school shootings—a fact that has escaped public scrutiny because
of a focus on “bullying”: Most of the school shooters targeted girls primarily; and, the shooters,
who fell well outside the range of acceptable masculine body types, had weathered attacks on
their masculinity, including homophobic taunts, for months—and in some cases, years.
Bullying and Sexual Harassment Incidence
To date, there have been two national studies of bullying and two of sexual harassment
that provide the broadest statistics regarding these behaviors in U.S. schools. The United States
Department of Education School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey
(2003) reported that in 2001 8% of middle and high school students were bullied (9% males, 7%
females) up 3% from 1999. An earlier study on bullying, conducted by the 1998 National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (Nansel et al, 2001) found that one third of
children in grades 6 through 10 were directly involved in bullying, with 10 % as bullies, 13% as
victims and 6% as both. Two national studies on sexual harassment conducted in 1993 and 2001
by The American Association of University Women (AAUW) found similar results for both
years: 81% of students experienced some form of sexual harassment during their school years.
Fifty-nine percent of students were harassed occasionally and 27% were targeted often (AAUW,
2001). In addition, 54% of students said they sexually harassed someone during their school

7

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
years. In a fashion similar to bullying, grade level makes a difference in sexual harassment
frequency; but in contrast to bullying, it increases with grade level: 55 % of 8-9th graders and 61
% of 10-11th graders reported that they had been physically sexually harassed at school (Hand &
Sanchez, 2000).
When the results of these four national studies are compared it is striking that over eighty
percent of students said they had experienced sexual harassment while less than 1 of 6 reported
being bullied. Also, more than half of students said they perpetrated sexual harassment while
only 10% reported bullying others. Students who reported being both harasser and harassed
constituted 55% (AAUW, 1993) while those who were bullied or who bullied others were about
a quarter of that figure (NICHHD: Nansel et al, 2001). These differences result most likely not
from students’ differential experiences (i.e., that sexual harassment is much more common than
bullying), but rather from substantial differences in measurement. It is difficult to understand
which behaviors are more common in schools—and which have more adverse effects—because
researchers use different measures of bullying and sexual harassment and construct different time
frames. For example, the AAUW studies of sexual harassment used a 14-item scale that asked
students to indicate the frequency of each experience. In contrast, research based on Olweus
(1993) uses a single questionnaire item which contains the word “bullying” along with a
definition (e.g., Elsea, Memesini, Moore, & Morita, 2003; Nansel et al., 2001; Williams,
Connolly, Pepler, & Craig, 2005). It is likely that this procedure—asking a single question that
refers to “bullying”—underestimates the number of respondents who have been victims of
aggressive behavior from their peers. Lessons from sexual harassment research are instructive in
this regard. By the mid-1980’s the protocol for survey development was to use multiple survey

8

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
items to tap different dimensions of sexual harassment (e.g., Fitzgerald and her colleagues
identified three forms of sexual harassment—gender harassment, unwanted sexual attention, and
sexual coercion) and to not use the words “sexual harassment” because doing so lead to
significantly lower estimates of experiences that could otherwise be deemed “sexual harassment”
according to theoretical or legal definitions (Fitzgerald & Shullman, 1993; Gruber, 1990).
Consequently, most harassment surveys over the last two decades have asked respondents if they
experienced “uninvited and unwanted sexual attention” (e.g., United States Merit System
Protection Board [USMSPB], 1988, 1995). In this regard, the AAUW surveys ask adolescents
“How often has anyone done the following things to you when you did not want them to?”
Additionally, the time frames presented to respondents so that they could determine whether or
not they were harassed or bullied vary from study to study. While the AAUW studies asked
students if they had ever had one or more sexual harassment experiences “during your school
years,” the National Crime Victimization Survey asked about bullying experiences that occurred
“during the last 6 months.” Different time frames are used in victimization studies even when
both phenomena are studied together. DeSouza and Ribiero (2005) used “last 30 days” for
bullying and “last 12 months” for sexual harassment. Similarly, Williams et al. (2005) framed
bullying as experiences that occurred “during the last 2 months” and sexual harassment as
“during the last 6 months.” Holt and Espelage (2007), using AAUW (2001) questions with a
one-year time frame (“during the last twelve months”) along with their own bullying scale items
and time frame (“last 30 days”) found that 70% of the students had been harassed while a little
more than half (54%) had been bullied. So, it is not surprising, then, that sexual harassment

9

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
seems to be rampant in schools compared to bullying when the question and response formats
and the times frames differ substantially.
Bullying and Sexual Harassment Victimization: Mental and Physical Health Outcomes
A perusal of the separate research veins on bullying and sexual harassment seems to
indicate that there are adverse health outcomes common to both. Research conducted by the
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (1998) found that bullied students
experienced greater difficulty making friends, had poorer relationships with classmates, and were
lonelier. Other studies of bullying have found consistently that "youth who are bullied generally
show higher levels of insecurity, anxiety, depression, loneliness, unhappiness, physical and
mental symptoms, and low self esteem" (Nansel et al., 2001, p.2095). Espelage and Holt (2001)
found that 20% of middle school victims scored within the clinical range on a standard
depression and anxiety measure. Similarly, Hawker and Boulton (2000) showed that bullied kids
were five times more likely to be depressed than non-bullied children. According to Hazler,
Hoover and Oliver (1992) and Kochenderfer and Ladd (1996) bullying affects academic
behavior as well: The former found that 90% of bullied students experienced a drop in school
grades, while the latter reported that victimization was related to school absenteeism and
attrition.
Some of these adverse effects appear in sexual harassment studies as well. According to
the AAUW studies (1993, 2001), students who experienced sexual harassment reported negative
psychosocial effects such as depression, loss of appetite, nightmares or disturbed sleep, low self
esteem and feelings of being sad, afraid, scared, or embarrassed (Hand & Sanchez, 2000; Lee,
Cronnger, Linn, & Chen, 1996). Students also reported a loss of interest in regular activities and

10

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
isolation from friends and family. In addition, school performance difficulties included
absenteeism, decreased quality of schoolwork, skipping or dropping classes, poor grades,
tardiness, and truancy (AAUW, 1993, 2001; Corbett, Gentry, & Pearson, 1993; Hand & Sanchez,
2000; Lee et al., 1996)
Bullying and Sexual Harassment: Gender and Sexual Orientation
Research suggests that girls are sexually harassed more frequently than boys (e.g.,
AAUW, 1993, 2001; Fineran & Bennett, 1999), but boys are bullied more often than girls
(Nansel et al. 2001). Boys are the primary perpetrators of both sexual harassment and bullying
(AAUW, 1993, 2001; Fineran & Bennett, 1999; Hand & Sanchez, 2000; Lee et al., 1996;
McMaster, Connolly, Pepler & Craig, 2002). According to Nansel et al. (2001) and others the
forms of bullying vary by sex: Girls are bullied more frequently than boys through the use of
rumors and sexual comments (sexual harassment?) while boys more often report being hit,
slapped or pushed. These gender differences also point to a difference in impact. Apparently,
victimization has greater impact on girls. Girls experience more negative psychological effects
from sexual harassment than boys—feeling afraid, self conscious, or embarrassed (Duffy,
Wareham & Walsh, 2004). And, based on a meta-analysis (Hawker and Boulton, 2000) of peer
victimization research published over a 20 year time period , bullied girls reported more severe
health problems (e.g., suicidal behavior) than boys.
There is limited research on sexual orientation but it is compelling. The Massachusetts
Youth Risk Behavior Survey (Massachusetts Department of Education, 2007) compared gay,
lesbian and bisexual students to their peers and found that sexual minority students had higher
suicidality, were more apt to skip school because they felt unsafe, had been threatened with or

11

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
injured by a weapon at school, and experienced more dating violence and non-conconsensual
sex. A study of 712 high school students conducted by Fineran (2002) found that sexual
minority students were physically assaulted and sexually harassed more frequently than
heterosexual students and they and heterosexual girls reported being significantly more upset and
threatened by peer sexual harassment than their heterosexual male peers. According to Williams
et al. (2005), gay and lesbian students also experienced both bullying and sexual harassment at
higher levels than their heterosexual counterparts; and, according to Poteat and Espelage (2007)
being the target of homophobic victimization had significant psychological and social
consequences for students. A recent report (2005) by the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education
Network (GLSEN) on Michigan schools revealed that two-thirds of students in their sample were
harassed because they were, or appeared to be gay or lesbian. More than 80% of these students
reported hearing derogatory homophobic comments. According to Thurlow (2001), however,
most adolescents rate homophobic slurs as both more common and less serious than racial slurs.
It appears, then, that homophobia may be a “normalized” means of categorizing and victimizing
peers during adolescence that has devastating consequences for some teens, in particular, sexual
minorities.
Purpose of the Study
This study addresses the need for school sexual harassment and bullying to be studied
together in the same research project. Specifically, we addressed the “How much?” and “With
what impact?” questions by using survey items that had the same format for both bullying and
sexual harassment items--e.g., asking students if they have experienced a particular form of
behavior (without using the words bullying or harassment) “Never,” “A few times” or “Many

12

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
times”)--and the same time frame (“Since the beginning of the school year”). We also utilized
standardized measures of health outcomes evident in most child and adolescent research that are
often missing from current sexual harassment and bullying research.
Research Issues for this Study
1) The research literature suggests that sexual harassment is more common than bullying.
This assumption has not been tested meaningfully because of the use of different
measures and time frames. Since bullying involves both sexes as targets and as
perpetrators more frequently than sexual harassment does, we expect to find a higher
incidence of bullying than sexual harassment. Also, a perusal of the research suggests
that bullying is a common experience for boys while girls and sexual minority students
are more frequently targets of sexual harassment. The fact that sexual harassment is
substantially higher among working women and sexual minorities is clearly documented
(e.g., USMSPB, 1995; Fitzgerald et al., 1999) leads us to expect similar results in our
sample of students.
2) We argued earlier that sexual harassment is more closely linked than bullying is to
cultural constructions of gender and sexuality, and to subsequent differences in power
and privilege. Therefore, we expect that sexual harassment will be a stronger predictor
than bullying of a greater number of health outcomes. In particular, we predict that the
adverse health outcomes of sexual harassment will be especially acute for girls and
sexual minorities. Testing this hypothesis involves three steps. First, we study whether
there are health outcome differences that vary by gender and sexual orientation. This will
provide general information on the health and well-being of the students in the sample.

13

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Second, we compare health outcomes separately for bullying and sexual harassment to
determine the degree of impact that each has. This step is unique since our study uses
measures of bullying and sexual harassment that are more comparable to each other than
previous studies have. Finally, we take a final step of doing a “head—to-head”
comparison of both forms of victimization by including them together in the same
regression equations. This is the first study to conduct such a comparison. In order to
isolate the effects of bullying and sexual harassment on health outcomes we employ
control variables that capture some of the aspects of adolescent life that adversely affect
health, namely stressful life events and school stress.

Method
Sample
Data were drawn from American students at a middle school and a high school in a
suburban New England community who completed paper and pencil surveys during classes that
drew a wide range of students (health or English). Parental consent forms were sent home with
the students. The parents were told that the survey covered a range of topics including bullying
and sexual harassment, attitudes toward school, and health and well-being. Students who
received parental consent were given an assent form along with the survey during class. Both
parental consent and student assent forms followed Institutional Review Board procedures which
specified that the survey was voluntary and that information given by the students was

14

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
confidential. The final sample consisted of 154 girls and 142 boys in middle school (grades 7-9),
and 70 girls and 156 boys in high school (grades 10-12). The middle school response rate (53%)
was higher than that of the high school students (48%). The demographic characteristics of the
samples were quite similar to the student body at each school. For example, non-whites
represented 11% of middle school and 15% of high school students. Our sample consisted of
12% and 16%, respectively.
Measures
Predictor variables.

Gender and sexual orientation were dichotomous variables coded 0

and 1. The latter value was assigned to girls or to self-identified sexual minorities (gay, lesbian,
bisexual) as well as questioning students. Girls comprised approximately forty-three percent of
the sample. Ninety-one percent of the students described themselves as heterosexual. We
included questioning students (i.e., students who indicated that they were not sure about their
sexual orientation) in the sexual minorities category based on research by Williams et al. (2005).
They found that questioning students had similar victimization experiences, social support, and
psychological adjustment problems as those who self-identified as gay, lesbian, or bisexual.
Bullying and Sexual Harassment. Ten survey items developed by Espelage and Holt
(2001) and fourteen items from the AAUW survey (2001) were used to measure bullying and
sexual harassment, respectively. Students were asked how often they had experienced each
behavior (Never, A few times, Many times) during the school year, who the perpetrators were,
and their reaction (See Appendix for survey items). The individual items were summed to create
the respective scales. Each scale had high reliability: Bullying (Cronbach’s alpha=.89); sexual
harassment (alpha=.92). In order to conform to formal and literal definitions of these behaviors

15

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
we operationalized “bullying” or “sexual harassment” as repeated behavior. Additionally, we
considered the complexity of these experiences—i.e., that different forms of verbal behavior
(teasing as well as threatening) or a combination of physical and verbal behavior are typically
aspects of bullying or harassment experiences. Consequently, we defined a student as being
bullied or harassed if he/she had three or more different experiences at least “A few times” (e.g.,
a student was “bullied” if he/she was teased, was pushed or shoved, and was excluded from
friends). This operationalization both acknowledges and extends the study of bullying published
by Peskin and her colleagues who defined a victim of bullying as a person who has experienced
at least one type of bullying behavior at least three times in the last 30 days (Peskin, Tortolero, &
Markham, 2006).
Based on our operationalizations, a little more than half (52.3%) of our sample had been
bullied, while slightly more than a third (35.3%) were sexually harassed. Our measures of
bullying and sexual harassment are correlated (r=.56, p<.01) indicating that both experiences
were common to a number of students. Specifically, 32% of students had been both bullied and
harassed; 28% had experienced one but not both; and 40% had experienced neither.
Health Outcomes. Five outcome variables were used in this analysis that tapped different
dimensions of overall health and well being. (See Appendix for survey items). Self Esteem was
measured by four items from Bowen and Richman (1995) for use with adolescents. The items
were summed to produce a scale with a range of 4-12 where M=6.26, SD=2.2 (alpha=.90 ). We
also used items from Bowen and Richman to measure mental and physical health. The Mental
Health scale (alpha=.81) consisted of six items which tapped evaluations such as feeling
successful, being pleased with self, or feeling lonely or fearful during the last week.. A scale was

16

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
created by combining these items (range=1-11; M=5.61; SD=2,7). A Physical Health scale was
developed from a factor analysis of twelve items. Seven items that formed a factor (alpha=.83)
were used to create a scale (range=1-12; M=5.81; SD=3.4) These items asked students how
often they had experienced such problems as trouble going to sleep, upset stomach/stomach
ache, headache, or dizziness in the last seven days. Impact of Events Scale (Trauma Symptoms)
was based on eight items (alpha=.91) developed by Dyregrov and Yule (1995) to use with
children. The respondents were asked how frequently each item applied to them regarding their
most upsetting bullying or sexual harassment experience (e.g., I thought about it when I didn't
mean to, I had waves of strong feelings about it). The combined items resulted in a scale with 110 range where M=5.19 and SD=3.2. Substance Abuse was based on a single item from Hanisch
and Hulin (1991) where “Drank alcohol or used drugs because of things that happened at school”
was one of several responses to the query “During this school year did you do any of these things
to deal with stress at school?” where the response categories ranged from 1 (Never) to 4 (Many
times). Sixty-one percent (61%) of students responded “Never” to this survey item.
Control Variables. As we discussed earlier, a considerable range of health outcomes are
associated with bullying and sexual harassment. However, this victimization is part of a larger
social context that includes positive, health-affirming events as well as other negative
experiences. Relationships with parents and siblings, academic performance, interactions with
teachers and other adults are all part of this context, and they all have implications for students’
health and well-being. Parental divorce, residential upheaval, and conflict with parents are
significantly related to a number of health outcomes, including depression, physical ailments,
and social adjustment (Newman et al., 2007; Waaktaar et al. 2004; Windle & Mason, 2004).

17

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Similarly, students’ connectedness to school and teachers, as well as academic achievement are
related to health and well-being (Prelow, Bowman, &Weaver, 2007; Filozof et al., 1998;
Needham, Crosnoe, & Muller, 2004). In order to more clearly isolate the effects of bullying and
sexual harassment on health outcomes we chose two control variables for our regression analyses
that focused on either social or family life or school or academic life: Stressful Life Events Scale
for Adolescents (SLESA: Newcomb, Huba, & Bentley, 1981) and School Stress (Bowen &
Richman, 1995). SLESA asks respondents to gauge the impact (from extremely positive to
extremely negative) of events that may have occurred in the last year (e.g., parents divorced, they
changed schools, broke up with boyfriend/girlfriend). The items were added and then converted
to a 1-10 scale (alpha=.90) where 1=Very positive impact, 5=No Impact, and 10=Very negative
impact. School Stress (alpha=.81) is based on 6 items that asked students “What is school like
for you most of the time?” with 5-point Likert scales (“Not at all like me” to “Very much like
me”). Items included “I find school hectic” and “I find school exciting.” (See Appendix for
survey items). The items were combined and converted to a 1-10 scale where M=5.27 and
SD=2.5. All health outcomes were significantly correlated with Stressful Life Events and School
Stress with correlations ranging from r=.125 (p<.05) for Substance Abuse and Stressful Life
Events to r=.386 (p<.01) for School Stress and Physical Health. We opted not to use either age
or grade level (middle or high school) as control variables since correlational analyses revealed
that neither was significantly related to bullying or sexual harassment. For example, Pearson’s r
for age and bullying was .024 (p=.51), and .072 (p=.10) for age and sexual harassment.
Furthermore, the correlations with age were not significant for either girls or boys. A higher

18

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
incidence of both bullying (55% versus 50%) and sexual harassment (38% versus 33%) occurred
in high school compared to middle school, but these differences were not statistically significant.
Results
Our first research question addresses the issue of frequency. Which is more frequent—
bullying or sexual harassment? And, are there gender and sexual orientation differences in
bullying and sexual harassment? Answers can be found in Table I. Using the same time frame
and the same benchmark for determining whether or not victimization has occurred, bullying is
revealed as a much more common experience than sexual harassment. More than half (52%) of
students had experienced bullying during the current school year while approximately one-third
(34%) were sexually harassed. There were no significant gender differences in this regard: Boys
experienced slightly more bullying than girls (53% vs. 51%), and girls were harassed a little
more often than boys (36% vs. 34%). Large differences were found, however, for sexual
orientation. GLBQ students experienced more bullying (79 vs. 50%) and sexual harassment
____________________________________________
Table I about here
____________________________________________
(71% vs. 32%), and the corresponding regression coefficients were significant for both (b=.217
and b=.280, respectively). GLBQ students were bullied more often than were harassed (79% vs
71%) but this difference was not statistically significant.
The second research issue we explore in this paper is the impact of bullying and sexual
harassment on health outcomes. We begin first by analyzing differences in health outcomes
between the subgroups that are the focus of this paper—girls and boys, and GLBQ and

19

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
heterosexuals. The research cited earlier found that girls and sexual minorities generally have
poorer health functioning than other students. We determine the extent to which this is true for
the students in our sample and proceed with the next matter of the impact of bullying and sexual
harassment on health. The results of t-tests show that girls have significantly poorer
_____________________________________
Table II about here
______________________________________
health than boys for four outcomes: The former have poorer self esteem, mental and physical
health, more trauma symptoms but similar levels of substance abuse.. Except for substance
abuse, GLBQ students have poorer health outcomes than their heterosexual peers. Heterosexuals
report greater use of substances than GLBQ students.
Given the poorer health outcomes among girls and GLBQ students, the next task is to
determine the impact of bullying and sexual harassment individually on each outcome by t-tests
and through regression analyses which include Life Events and School Stress as control
variables. The analyses reveal significant relationships between health outcomes and both
bullying and sexual harassment. All five t-tests and regression equations for bullying as well as
those for sexual harassment are statistically significant. Bullying and sexual harassment have
____________________________________________
Table III about here
_____________________________________________
particularly large effects on physical health (b=.296 and b=.335, respectively) and trauma
symptoms (b=.269 and b=.389). In contrast, the effects of bullying and harassment are smaller

20

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
on self esteem (b=.148 and b=.146) and substance abuse (b=.135 and b=.127). A perusual of the
coefficient sizes suggests that comparable measures of bullying and sexual harassment
individually predict health outcomes in fairly similar ways. However, since the predictors are
correlated, the relative impact of each on the outcomes is not demonstrated by these
comparisons.
The third and final step of the analyses of health outcomes is comparing the predictive
strength of bullying and sexual harassment simultaneously on each outcome. Specifically,
bullying and sexual harassment were entered together into each regression equation using the
control variables that we described earlier.

Separate analyses were conducted for girls, boys,

and GLBQ students. Since bullying and sexual harassment were correlated (r=.56, p<.01)
collinearity diagnostics that are available on SPSS 14.0 were conducted for each outcome and
each group An examination of Tolerance and Condition Index figures for the twenty regression
equations revealed that multicollinearity was not a problem since the lowest levels of the former
were .65 and, figures for the latter did not exceed 11.0. Tolerance levels that are less than .10
(Norusis, 2003) or Condition Index levels over 30 (Belsley, Kuh, & Welsch, 1980) indicate
significant multicollinearity problems. The results for the entire sample of students (1st column)
_________________________________________
Table IV about here
__________________________________________
show that the regression coefficient for sexual harassment is larger than the corresponding one
for bullying for all five outcomes. Also, while all five outcome-harassment coefficents are
significant, two for bullying (trauma symptoms and substance abuse) are not. As we saw earlier

21

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
(Table III), bullying predicted each outcome, as did sexual harassment. It is only when they are
placed in the same equation for each outcome that their differences in predictive power emerge.
These results lend support to our hypothesis that sexual harassment has more adverse impact
than bullying because of the former’s stronger basis in cultural stereotypes about gender and
sexuality.
The pattern of differences between bullying and sexual harassment and the outcomes
extends to sub-group analyses with a few exceptions. For girls, eight of a possible ten
relationships (5 bully-outcome and 5 harassment-outcome relationships) are significant. All five
harassment-outcome coefficients are significant and three bullying-outcome coefficients are (self
esteem, mental health, and physical health) are. The harassment coefficient is larger than the one
for bullying for four outcomes. For physical health, the coefficient for bullying is larger (b=.300
versus b=.204). Only four of a possible ten coefficients are significant among boys. Neither
bullying nor sexual harassment predicts boys’ self esteem or substance abuse. Among the four
significant relationships, three are with sexual harassment—mental health (b=.227), physical
health (b=.286), and trauma symptoms (b=.355). The lone significant coefficient for bullying is
with mental health (b=.191). Based on the number of significant coefficients, it is apparent that
girls experience a broader range of adverse health effects from bullying and sexual harassment
than boys do. For both sexes, however, sexual harassment causes more harm than bullying.
Among GLBQ students, four of ten coefficients are significant, and all four involve
sexual harassment. Sexual harassment predicts mental health (b=.393), physical health (b=.606),
trauma symptoms (b=.403), and substance abuse (b=.372). The strength of sexual harassment
over bullying on health outcomes follows a similar pattern as found for girls and boys.

22

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Discussion.
This study provides new insight on sexual harassment and bullying victimization in
school. Both types of victimization were measured in similar ways with the same time format.
And this lead to the finding that bullying was a more common experience than sexual
harassment. This was expected since bullying behavior is more reciprocal (i.e., a significant
number of students in other research are described as “bully/victims”) and involves same-sex as
well as opposite-sex behaviors. There were no significant gender differences with regard to
either; but GLBQ students experience significantly higher rates than other students. Research on
adults, by contrast, has found very marked differences in the harassment rates of female and
male workers (e.g., USMSPB, 1995). As research has shown for both groups—adolescents and
adults—males are much more likely to be perpetrators than females. It appears, then, that
adolescence is a key point in male development when issues of male dominance and privilege
are played out, not only in terms of boy-girl relationships but also in terms of boy-boy
hierarchies as well.
We found that life during middle and high school takes a heavier toll on the health and
well-being of girls and GLBQ students than on boys (Table II). At the same, we showed that
bullying and sexual harassment have pervasive effects on health (Table III): Each was
significantly related (t-tests as well as regression coefficients) to all five outcomes. These results
suggested two interpretations: The pervasiveness of the impacts on health meant that bullying
and sexual harassment affected a large number of students, including boys; but, the adverse
outcomes were especially felt by girls and sexual minority students. Our subsequent analysis
(Table IV) confirmed these arguments.

23

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
We expected that boys would be more negatively impacted by bullying while girls and
sexual minorities would suffer more from sexual harassment. We were partially correct in that
sexual harassment was linked to poor health outcomes for girls and GLBQ students. However,
we found that boys, too, were more affected by sexual harassment than by bullying.
Our study, the first of its kind to compare bullying and sexual harassment victimization
using equivalent measurements and time frames has found that the less frequent form of
victimization (sexual harassment) plays a greater role in poor health outcomes than the more
pervasive one (bullying). These results demonstrate the power of sexuality and sexual
stereotypes in drawing the “gender transgression zone”(McGuffey & Rich, 1999). While namecalling, teasing, and physical aggression (bullying) negatively impact adolescents as this study
and a host of other studies have shown, this paper revealed the harm that is done when words and
deeds have a sexual element to them. While sexual harassment is typically a cross-sex
phenomenon, research on adolescents reveals that same-sex harassment is harmful as well.
When asked to describe how upsetting specific bullying or harassment experiences were (see
Appendix), girls cited sexual rumors and boys listed being called gay as the most upsetting of all
items. And they listed members of their own sex as the perpetrators.
The impact of sexual harassment compared to bullying is also notable among sexual
minorities. Their mean scores on health outcomes were higher (poorer) than girls or boys on
four health outcomes (Table 2). Subsequent analyses (Table 4) revealed that sexual harassment
had a stronger role than bullying in creating adverse health outcomes. Also, GLBQ sexual
harassment coefficients were considerably larger than those for either boys or girls for the same
outcomes. These results suggest that adolescents whose sexual identity is marginalized (gay or

24

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
lesbian) or in a flux (questioning) are particularly harmed by words and deeds that are frequently
used in adolescent culture to draw gender and sexual boundaries. As others have suggested, the
adverse effects of harassment can be exacerbated by a lack of social support from peers and
adults (Williams et al., 2005), or as a result of bystander harassment where they witness others
being disparaged by the use of homophobic language (Poteat & Espelage, 2007). Not only is the
development of support systems at school important to safeguard the well-being of gay, lesbian,
and questioning adolescents, it is also crucial to develop or reinforce policies to control the use
of sexually derogatory language. In general, our analysis should alert educators, parents, and
researchers about the role that sexual harassment plays vis-à-vis bullying, and that the current
trend of focusing on the latter problem, or else subsuming harassment under bullying, draws
attention away from a significant health risk.
Limitations
Our study has several limitations. First, our sample consists mostly of white students that
were drawn from one school district. A more racially and ethnically diverse sample may have
produced somewhat different results because of differences in perceptions of, and reactions to
bullying or sexual harassment (Buchanan, 2005; Shupe et al., 2002). Also, because we had a
small number of sexual minority students we were not able to compare differences in
experiences and health outcomes between girls and boys. Given the stigma of being labeled gay
in male culture, it would have been interesting to see if gay boys have significantly poorer health
than lesbian girls as a result of victimization. Because of our operationalizations a number of
students who had a small number of bullying and sexual harassment experiences were not
defined as having been “bullied” or “sexually harassed.” Since even low levels of sexual

25

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
harassment—at least among adults—adversely affects health outcomes (Schneider, Swan &
Fitzgerald, 1998), it is possible that we underestimated the harm resulting from bullying or
sexual harassment among the adolescents in our study. Finally, it is possible that some of the
adolescents in our study were bullied or harassed because of significant health deficits. Our
analysis assumed that adverse health outcomes were the result of victimization. A recent study
by Fekkes et al. (2006) found that depressed and anxious children had a higher probability of
being bullied than did their peers; and these experiences further compromised their mental
health. The cross-sectional design of our survey did not allow us to explore this issue.
Conclusion
A significant amount of time and energy has been dedicated to bullying prevention with
the assumption that this will create a safer environment for students. This study raises the
question as to whether victimization at school can be addressed successfully by focusing on only
one of the two significant problems in this regard. We are not suggesting that bullying
prevention programs be curtailed; rather, we would argue that sexual harassment prevention
receive attention as a distinct focus. All students need to benefit from a safe school environment
and the mental and physical health implications from sexual harassment and bullying behaviors
need to be considered. Keeping schools safe in the 21st century is a worthy goal but continuing
to focus on boys’ behavior and bullying violence in schools, rather than on all students’ negative
experiences with sexual harassment detracts from our ability to provide a healthy environment
for all children.

26

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.

Bibliography
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation. (2001). Hostile
hallways: Bullying, teasing and sexual harassment in school. Washington, D.C.: Author.
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation. (1993). Hostile
hallways: The AAUW survey on sexual harassment in American schools (Research Rep.
No. 923012). Washington, D.C.: Harris/Scholastic Research.
Belsey, D., Kuh, E., & Welsch, R. (1980). Regression diagnostics: Identifying influential data
and sources of collinearity. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Boulton, M., & Hawker, D. (2000). Twenty years' research on peer victimization and
psychosocial maladjustment: A meta-analytic review of cross-sectional studies. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 41, 441-55.
Bowen, G., & Richman, J. (1995). The school success profile. Chapel Hill, NC.: University of
North Carolina.

27

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Buchanan, N. (2005). The nexus of race and gender domination: Racialized sexual harassment
of African American women. In J. Gruber, and P. Morgan, (Eds.), In the company of
men: Male dominance and sexual harassment, 294-320. Boston: Northeastern
University Press.
Chen, X., Croninger, R., Lee, V., & Linn, E. (1996). The culture of sexual harassment in
secondary schools. American Educational Research Journal, 33, 383-417.
Connolly, J., Craig, W., Henderson, K., & Pepler. D. (2002). My friends made me do it: Peer
influence on alcohol and substance use in adolescence. In A. Wall, and C. Wekerle,
(Eds.) The violence and addiction equation: Theoretical and clinical issues in substance
abuse and relationship violence. Philadelphia: Brunner/Mazel.
Connolly, J., Craig, W., McMaster, L., & Pepler, D. (2002). Peer to peer sexual harassment in
early adolescence: A developmental perspective. Development and Psychopathology, 14,
91-105.
Corbett, K., Gentry, C., & Pearson, W. (1993). Sexual harassment in high school. Youth &
Society, 25, 93-103.
Crick, N. (1996). The role of overt, relational aggression, and prosocial behavior in the
prediction of children's future social adjustment. Child Development, 67, 2317-27.
DeSouza, E., & Ribeiros, J. (2005). Bullying and sexual harassment among Brazilian high
school students. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 20, 1018-38.
Dyregrov, A., & Yule, W. (1995). Screening measures: The development of the UNICEF
screening battery. Presented at the annual meeting of the International Society of
Traumatic Stress Studies, Boston, Massachusetts.

28

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Duffy, J., Walsh, M., & S. Wareham, S. (2004). Psychological consequences for high school
students of having been sexually harassed. Sex Roles, 50, 811-21.
Eslea, M., Menesini, M., Moore, A., & Morita, Y. (2004). Friendship and loneliness among
bullies and victims: data from seven countries. Aggressive Behavior, 30, 71-83.
Espelage, D., & Holt, M. (2001). Bullying and victimization during early adolescence: Peer
influences and psychosocial correlates. In R. Geffner, and M. Loring, (Eds.), Bullying
Behavior: Current Issues, Research, and Interventions. Binghamton, N.Y.: Haworth
Press Inc.
Fekkes, M., Pijpers, F., Fredriks, T., Vogels, T., & Verloove-Vanhorick, S. (2006). Do bullied
children get ill, or do ill children get bullied? A prospective cohort study on the
relationship between bullying and health-related symptoms. Pediatrics, 117, 15681575.
Fineran, S. (2002). Sexual minority students and peer sexual harassment in high school. Journal
of School Social Work, 11, 50-69.
Fineran, S., & Bennett, L. (1999). Gender and power issues of peer sexual harassment among
teenagers. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 14, 626-641.
Fitzgerald, L., & Shullman, S. (1993). Sexual harassment: A research analysis and agenda for
the 1990’s. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 42, 5-27.
Fitzgerald, L., Magley, V., Drasgow, F., & Waldo, C. (1999). Measuring sexual harassment in
the military: The Sexual Experiences Questionnaire. Military Psychology, 11, 243-263.
Filozof, E., Albertin, H., Jones, C., & Steme, S. (1998). Relationship of adolescent self-esteen
to selected academic variables. The Journal of School Health, 68, 68-72.

29

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Gruber, J. (1990). Methodological problems and policy implications in sexual harassment
research. Population Research and Policy Review, 9, 235-254.
Hand, J., & Sanchez, L. (2000). Badgering or bantering? Gender differences in experience of,
and reactions to, sexual harassment among U.S. high school students. Gender & Society,
14, 718-46.
Hanisch, K., & Hulin, C. (1991). General attitudes and organizational withdrawal: An
evaluation of a causal model. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 39, 110-28.
Kimmel, M., & Mahler, M. (2003). Adolescent masculinity, homophobia, and violence:
Random school shootings, 1982-2000. American Behavioral Scientist, 46, 1439-1458.
Klein, J. (2006a). An invisible problem: Everyday violence against girls in schools. Theoretical
Criminology, 10, 147-177.
Klein, J. (2006b). Sexuality and school shootings: What role does teasing play in school
massacres? Journal of Homosexuality, 51, 39-62.
Lee, V., Croninger, R., Linn, E., & Chen, X. (1996). The culture of sexual harassment in
secondary schools. American Educational Research Journal, 33, 383-417.
MacKinnon, C. (1979). Sexual harassment of working women. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
McGuffey, C., & Rich, M. (1999). Playing in the gender transgression zone: race, class, and
hegemonic masculinity in middle school. Gender & Society, 13, 608-627.
McMaster, L., Connolly, J., Pepler D., & Craig, W. (2002). Peer to peer sexual harassment in
early adolescence: A developmental perspective. Development and Psychopathology, 14,
91-105.

30

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Markham, C., Peskin, M., & Tortolero, S. (2006). Bullying and victimization among black and
Hispanic adolescents. Adolescence 41, 467-84.
Massachusetts Department of Education. (2007). 2005 Youth risk behavior survey. Malden,
MA: Author.
Massachusetts Department of Education. (1998). 1998 Massachusetts youth risk
behavior survey results. Boston, author.
Nansel, T., Overpeck, R., Pilla, W., Ruan, P., Scheidt, K., & Simons-Morton, B. (2001).
Bullying behaviors among US youth: Prevalence and association with psychological
adjustment. Journal of the American Medical Association, 285, 2094-2100.
Needham, B., Crosnoe, R., & Muller, C. (2004). Academic failure in secondary school: The
inter-related role of health problems and educational context. Social Problems, 51, 569586
Newcomb, M.D., Huba, G., & Bentley, P.M. (1981). A multidimensional Assessment of
stressful life events among adolescents: Derivation and correlates. Journal of Health and
Social Behavior, 22, 400-415.
Norusis, M. (2004). SPSS 13.0 Advanced statistical procedures companion. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Olweus, D. (1978). Aggression in the school: Bullies and whipping boys. Chichester, U.K:
Wiley.
Olweus, D. (1993). Bullying at school. Oxford, U.K: Basil Blackwell.
Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc. (1998). 523 U.S. 75.
Pellegrini, A. (2001). A longitudinal study of heterosexual relationships, aggression and sexual

31

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
harassment during transition from primary school through middle school. Applied
Developmental Psychology 22, 119-33.
Permanent Commission (CT) on the Status of Women. (1995). In our own backyard: Sexual
harassment in Connecticut’s public high schools. Hartford, CT: Author.
Peskin, M., Tortolero, S., & Markham, C. (2006). Bullying and victimization among black and
Hispanic adolescents. Adolescence, 41, 467-484.
Poteat, V., & Espelage, D. (2007). Predicting psychosocial consequences of homophobic
victimization in middle school students. Journal of Early Adolescence, 27, 175-191.
Prelow, H., Bowman, G., &Weaver, S. (2007). Predictors of psychosocial well-being in urban
African American and European American youth: The role of ecological factors. Journal
of Youth and Adolescence, 36, 543-553
Schneider, K., Swan, S., & Fitzgerald, L. (1998). Job-related and psychological effects of sexual
harassment in the workplace. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 401-15.
Stein, N. (2003). Bullying or sexual harassment? The missing discourse of rights in an era of
zero tolerance. The Arizona Law Review, 45, 783-799.
Shupe, E., Cortina, L., Ramos, A., Fitzgerald, L., & Salisbury, J. (2002). The incidence and
outcomes of sexual harassment among Hispanic and non-Hispanic white women: A
comparison across levels of cultural affiliation. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 26,
298-308.
Schwartz, D., Dodge, K., Pettit, G., & Bates, J. (1997). The early socialization of aggressive
victims of bullying. Child Development, 68, 665-675.

32

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Thurlow, C. (2004). Naming the ‘outsider within’: homophobic pejoratives and the verbal abuse
of lesbian, gay and bisexual high-school students. Journal of Adolescence, 24, 25-38.
United States Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights. (1997). Sexual harassment
guidance: Harassment of students by school employees, other students, or third parties.
Federal Register 62, 12034-51.
United States Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights. (2003). School crime
supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey. Washington: Author.
United States Merit Systems Protection Board (USMSPB). (1995). Sexual harassment in the
Federal workplace: Trends, progress, and continuing challenges. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
United States Merit Systems Protection Board. (1988). Sexual harassment in the Federal
workplace: An update. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Waaktaar, T., Borge, A., Fundingsrud, H., Johnsen, H., & Torgersen, S. (2004). The role of
stressful life events in the development of depressive symptoms in adolescence--A
longitudinal community study. Journal of Adolescence, 27, 153-166.
Wilburn, V., & Smith, D. (2005). Stress, self-esteem, and suicidal ideation in late adolesents.
Adolescence, 40, 33-4.
Williams, T., Connolly, J., Pepler, D., & Craig, W. (2005). Peer victimization, social support,
and psychosocial adjustment of sexual minority adolescents. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 34, 471-482.

33

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.

Table I. Predictors of Bullying and Sexual Harassment
% Bullied a
(rounded)

Beta b

(n=)
Overall
Gender
Boys
Girls

52%

% Sexually
Harassed
(rounded)
35%

Beta

Difference:
Bully vs. SH c
<.01

.016 (.024)
(298)
(224)

53
51

.021
(.26)

34
36

34

<.01
<.01

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Sexual
Orientation
Hetero
GLBQ
a

.280 (.43) **
(470)
( 46)

50 **
79

.217 **
(.47)

32 **
71

<.01
NS

Percentages are derived from cross-tabulation. Students who had three or more

experiences were considered either bullied or sexually harassed. Significance levels are based on
chi square.
b

This is the only analyses where bullying and sexual harassment are dependent

variables. Rather than dichotomous variables (see Predictor variables above) we used scales
with the full range of values (0-20 and 0-24 for bullying and sexual harassment, respectively.
Betas are standardized regression coefficients. Standard errors are presented in parentheses.
c

Differences of proportions tests were conducted to compare the percentage of bullying

and sexual harassment for each category (e.g., percentage of boys bullied compared to
percentage of boys sexually harassed).
* p<.05 ** p<.01

Table II. Gender, Sexual Orientation, and Health Outcomes
Health Outcomes a
Scale Range

Gender
Girls
Mean/SD

Boys
Mean/SD b

Self Esteem

6.65 (2.3)

5.98 (2.1) **

4-12

Mental Health

6.46 (2.6)

5.01 (2.5) **

1-11

35

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.

Physical Health

6.52 (3.4)

5.32 (3.3) **

1-12

Trauma Symptoms

5.94 (3.1)

4.61 (3.2) **

1-10

Substance Abuse

1.40 (.87)

1.52 (1.1)

1-4

Sexual Orientation
GLBQ

Heterosexuals

Self Esteem

7.32 (2.5)

6.18 (2.1) **

4-12

Mental Health

7.76 (2.5)

5.44 (2.6) **

1-11

Physical Health

7.08 (3.3)

5.76 (3.4) **

1-12

Trauma Symptoms

6.68 (2.8)

5.06 (3.2) **

1-10

Substance Abuse

1.41 (.98)

1.98 (1.2) **

1-4

a

Higher scores are associated with poorer outcomes: lower self esteem, poorer health,

more trauma symptoms, and greater substance abuse.
b

Significance levels are based on t-tests.

* p<.05 **p<.01

Table III. Bullying, Sexual Harassment, and Health Outcomes
Health Outcomes a

Bullying
Bullied

Not Bullied

36

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Mean/SD

Mean/SD b

Beta/SD c

Self Esteem

6.65 (2.2)

5.79 (2.1) **

.148 (.20) **

Mental Health

6.33 (2.7)

4.77 (2.5) **

.214 (.23) **

Physical Health

6.87 (3.3)

4.67 (3.2) **

.296 (,27) **

Trauma Symptoms

5.94 (3.2)

4.21 (3.0) **

.269 (.24) **

Substance Abuse

1.59 (1.1)

1.26 (.78) **

.135 (.09) *

Sexual Harassment
Harassed

Not Harassed

Self Esteem

6.71 (2.3)

5.84 (2.1) **

.146 (.20) **

Mental Health

6.59 (2.6)

4.76 (2.5) **

.262 (.23) **

Physical Health

7.17 (3.2)

4.63 (3.1) **

.335 (.30) **

Trauma Symptoms

6.53 (2.9)

3.94 (2.9) **

.389 (.27) **

Substance Abuse

1.73 (1.1)

1.28 (.86) **

.127 (.09) *

a

Higher scores are associated with poorer outcomes: lower self esteem, poorer health, more

trauma symptoms, and greater substance abuse.
b

Significance levels are based on t-tests.

c

Standard regression coefficients and standard errors are presented. Regressions for each health

outcome used bullying or sexual harassment as predictors and controlled for gender, sexual orientation,
life events, and school stress.

Table IV. Bullying, Sexual Harassment, Gender, Sexual Orientation and Health Outcomes
Total

Girls

b

Boys

37

GLBQ

d

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Sample

a

c

Outcomes

Self Esteem
.
Bullying

.109 (.23)*

.170 (30) *

.087 (1.2)

.247 (1.5)

SexHar

.128 (.24) **

.201 (.24) **

.089 (.25)

.261 (1.6)

Bullying

.151 (.22)**

.163 (.34) *

.191 (.35)**

.168 (1.0)

SexHar

.246 (.20)**

.270 (.30) **

.227 (30) **

.393 (.86)**

Bullying

.163 (35)**

.300 (.42) **

.082 (.45)

.042 (1.2)

SexHar

.236 (.30)**

.204 (.38) **

.286 (.39) **

.606 (1.4)**

Bullying

.074 (.31)

.055 (.43 )

.123 (.43)

.085 (1.1)

SexHar

.358 (.33)**

.350 (.35) **

.355 (.36) **

.403 (1.3)**

Bullying

.085 (.10)

.076 (.11)

.033 (.10)

.152 (.64)

SexHar

.121 (.09)*

.181 (.12)**

.099 (.64)

.372 (.56)**

Mental Health

Physical Health

Trauma Symptoms

Substance Abuse

a

Bullying and sexual harassment were regressed on each outcome with gender, sexual

orientation, stressful life events, and school stress as controls.
b

Regressions were conducted separately for girls and boys. Each outcome was regressed with

bullying and sexual harassment, controlling for sexual orientation, life events, and school stress.
c

Positive regression coefficients denote being bullied or harassed and having poor health

outcomes.

38

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
d

Regressions were conducted separately for GLBQ students. Each outcome was regressed with

bullying and sexual harassment, controlling for gender, life events, and school stress.
** p<.01

*p<.05

39

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.

Appendix
Variable Measurement
Bullying
During this school year, have one or more students at school… (Never, A few times, Many
times)
Upset you for the fun of it.
Scared you.
Teased you
Picked on you.
Made fun of you.
Called you names.
Got in a physical fight with you.
Pushed, shoved, slapped, or kicked you.
Threatened to hurt or hit you.
Excluded you from your group of friends.
Sexual Harassment
During this school year, have one or more students at school done any of these things that you
did not want them to do. (Never, A few times, Many times)
Touched, grabbed or pinched you in a sexual way.
Cornered you in a sexual way.
Spread sexual rumors about you.

40

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Made sexual jokes about you.
Made sexual gestures or looks at you.
Showed, gave, or left you sexual pictures, messages, or notes
Wrote sexual messages about you on bathroom walls, locker rooms, or classroom
blackboards.
Called you gay or lesbian or a name like fag or dyke.
Spied on you as you showered or dressed at school.
Flashed or mooned you.
Pressured you for a date.
Pulled your clothing off or down.
Kissed or hugged you when you did not want it.
Listed you in a “slam book” with sexual remarks about you.
Sexual Orientation
What is your sexual orientation?
Heterosexual or straight
Gay or lesbian
Bisexual
Not sure
Self Esteem
How well does each statement describe you? (A lot, A little, Not at all)
I feel positive about myself.
I am satisfied with myself.

41

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
I have a number of good qualities.
I am able to do things as well as most other people.
Mental Health
During the past week, how often did you feel the following? (Never, Sometimes, Often)
Successful

Lonely

Pleased with yourself

Sad

Confident

Felt like crying

Physical Health
How often during the past 7 days have you experienced any of the problems listed below?
(None, 1-2 days, 3 days or more)
Loss of appetite

Upset stomach or stomach ache

Headache

Vomiting of feeling sick to your stomach

Dizziness or fainting

Trouble with nerves

Trouble going to sleep

Trauma Symptoms
Below is a list of comments made by people in response to stressful experiences. Please check
each item, indicating how frequently these comments were true for the experience [Respondent’s
description of bullying or sexual harassment experience that was the most upsetting] you
described above. (Not at all, Rarely, Sometimes, Often)
I thought about it when I didn’t mean to.
I tried to remove it from my memory.

42

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
I had waves of strong feelings about it.
I stayed away from reminders of it.
I tried not to talk about it.
Pictures of it popped into my mind.
Other things kept making me think of it.
I tried not to think about it.
Stressful Life Events
Please tell us a little bit about your life during the past year. Listed below are a number of life
events, both positive and negative…If you experienced an event in the last 12 months, rate the
event in terms of the impact it had on you. (Extremely negative, Very negative, Slightly
negative, No impact, Slightly positive, Very positive, Extremely positive.
Parents divorced

Had a serious accident or illness

Found a new group of friends

Got in trouble with the law

Stole something valuable

Increase in size of household

Given medication by physician

Fell in love

Family member died

Started seeing a therapist

Changed schools

Started dating regularly

Decided about college

Family had money problems

Broke up with girl/boy friend

Got in trouble in school

Thought about suicide

Started making own money

Was victim of a crime

Ran away from home

Got poor grades in school

Got pregnant or made someone pregnant

43

Gruber, J.E , & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the Impact of Bullying and
Sexual Harassment Victimization on the Mental and Physical Health of Adolescents
Sex Roles, 59, (1-2), 1-13.
Family moved

Parents argued or fought

Parents remarried

Gained or lost a lot of weight

School Stress
What is school like for you most of the time? (Not at all, A little bit, Moderately, Quite a bit,
Extremely)
I find school hectic.
I find school tense.
I find school fun.
I find school relaxing.
I find school exciting.
I find school stressful.

44

