This article appeared in a journal published by Elsevier. The attached
copy is furnished to the author for internal non-commercial research
and education use, including for instruction at the authors institution
and sharing with colleagues.
Other uses, including reproduction and distribution, or selling or
licensing copies, or posting to personal, institutional or third party
websites are prohibited.
In most cases authors are permitted to post their version of the
article (e.g. in Word or Tex form) to their personal website or
institutional repository. Authors requiring further information
regarding Elsevier’s archiving and manuscript policies are
encouraged to visit:
http://www.elsevier.com/copyright

Author's personal copy

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44 (2008) 1402–1408

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jesp

Reports

Effects of exposure to sex-stereotyped video game characters on tolerance
of sexual harassment q
Karen E. Dill *, Brian P. Brown, Michael A. Collins
Lenior-Rhyne College, School of Social and Behavioral Sciences, P.O. Box 7335, Hickory, NC 28601, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 24 August 2007
Revised 16 May 2008
Available online 18 June 2008
Keywords:
Stereotypes
Media
Aggression
Sexism
Power
Sexual harassment
Rape myths
Violence against women

a b s t r a c t
The violent video game literature has previously not extended to the domain of violence against women.
The current investigation tested the effects of exposure to sex-typed video game characters versus images
of professional men and women on judgments and attitudes supporting aggression against women.
Results showed experimental effects of short-term exposure to stereotypical media content on sexual
harassment judgments but not on rape myth acceptance. A signiﬁcant interaction indicated that men
exposed to stereotypical content made judgments that were more tolerant of a real-life instance of sexual
harassment compared to controls. Long-term exposure to video game violence was correlated with
greater tolerance of sexual harassment and greater rape myth acceptance. This data contributes to our
understanding of mass media’s role in socialization that supports violence against women.
Ó 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

According to Price Waterhouse Coopers, over the next 5 years the
video game industry will be the fastest growing of any entertainment category, and will earn a projected $55 billion internationally
by 2008 (Vargas, 2007). Most top-selling games and most of kids’
favorite games are violent (Anderson & Bushman, 2001; Dill, Gentile,
Richter, & Dill, 2005; Funk, Germann, & Buchman, 2000). A growing
body of research demonstrates a causal connection between exposure to video game violence and aggressive behavior, thoughts and
feelings (Anderson & Bushman, 2001; Anderson & Dill, 2000; Anderson, Gentile, & Buckley, 2007; Bartholow, Sestir, & Davis, 2005; see
Anderson et al., 2003 for a review). To date, effects research on video
game violence has not extended to the domain of violence against
women. This is a clear gap in the literature, especially given the
growing concern about sexist gender portrayals in video games
(Brenick, Henning, Killen, O’Connor, & Collins, 2007; Burgess,
Stermer, & Burgess, 2007; Dill & Thill, 2007; Scharrer, 2004; Walsh,
Gentile, VanOverbeke, & Chasco, 2002). The current investigation
is designed to bridge that gap by providing data showing a causal
relationship between sexist gender portrayals in video games and
two measures linked to violence against women: sexual harassment
judgments and rape-supportive attitudes.
Of all the forms of mass media popular with youth, video games
perpetuate perhaps the most uniform and unsubtle sex role ste-

q

The authors wish to thank Bruce Bartholow, Jeanne Funk, Craig Anderson and
Melinda Burgess for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: dillk@lrc.edu (K.E. Dill).
0022-1031/$ - see front matter Ó 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2008.06.002

reotypes. According to Dill and Thill (2007) popular gaming magazines portray 83% of male video game characters as violent.
Commonly, male video game characters are hyper-masculine
(‘‘macho”) and many scenes (32%) glamorize violence. These characterizations have important implications for gamers in that research has shown hyper-masculinity and hostile masculinity to
foster sexual aggression (Malamuth, Heavy, & Linz, 1993; Murnen,
Wright, & Kaluzny, 2007; Scharrer, 2005).
Female video game characters are consistently shown as beautiful, busty, scantily clad sex objects (Burgess et al., 2007; Dill &
Thill, 2007; Scharrer, 2004). Women in video games also are under-represented and marginalized; games rarely depict female heroes (Dill et al., 2005; Scharrer, 2004). Even when a game has a
female lead, she is still likely to be sexually objectiﬁed as exempliﬁed by Tomb Raider’s Lara Croft (Mikula, 2003).
Dill and Thill (2007) asked teenagers to describe typical male
and female video game characters. Teens described female characters as being sexually promiscuous, wearing revealing clothing and
as thin with large breasts. In contrast, they viewed typical male
characters as physically powerful, dominant, violent, mean and
cocky. These conceptions of masculinity and femininity can have
real-life implications for how video game players view the roles
and abilities of men and women.
Violence towards women in gaming
There are also current trends in gaming towards gloriﬁcation of
violence towards women and the perpetuation of a crass view of

Author's personal copy

K.E. Dill et al. / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44 (2008) 1402–1408

sexuality (Walsh et al., 2002). The Grand Theft Auto (GTA) series of
games, consistently among the top-sellers worldwide (see Top 25
PS2 Games of All Time, 2007), provides a pertinent example. In
GTA: Vice City the violent male hero can hire a prostitute–depicted
in scenes where a car rocks back and forth and the characters trade
sexual quips. Often these quips are sexually demeaning to both
men and women, including jibes from the prostitute such as
‘‘You in me yet?” Vice City also rewards violence against women:
if the male hero kills the prostitute after they have sex, he gets
his money back. When a male character punches a female prostitute, she does not respond by screaming or saying ‘‘no,”—negative
responses likely to happen in real social interactions—but rather is
programmed to retort, ‘‘I like it rough” and to punch back. Seventyﬁve percent of American boys under 17 have played a Grand Theft
Auto game, though they carry a Mature rating indicating that sales
to anyone under age 17 are prohibited (Walsh et al., 2002).
A theoretical model of media sexism effects
Anderson and colleagues’ General Aggression Model (e.g.,
Anderson et al., 2007) describes how knowledge structures about
aggression are formed and how they are accessed, considered,
and acted upon in relevant situations. In terms of the present
investigation, exposure to negative gender stereotypes in video
games will contribute to schemas and scripts about social relations
between men and women. For example, if a boy learns that males
are powerful and dominant and women are objects to be subjugated and used, these ideas will take root in his developing social
conscience and broadly inﬂuence his attitudes and behaviors towards women. The current investigation, then, ﬁts conceptually
within the broad framework of the General Aggression Model,
exemplifying how stereotypical images in the media cause beliefs
that foster violence against women.
Theories of hegemonic masculinity (Connell, 1987; Lull, 2003)
assert that modern media project myths about male dominance
and female submission in order to support a patriarchal social
structure. In other words, media stereotypes do not reﬂect reality—for example, few real men look or act like a prototypical muscle-bound, weapon-toting video game character –but rather
construct a stylized view of masculinity and femininity that inﬂuences the beliefs, feelings and actions of members of the culture.
According to Ambivalent Sexism Theory (AST; e.g., Glick et al.,
2004) many societies view men as aggressive and self-serving,
but ultimately as superior to women because the traditionally
masculine characteristics of dominance and instrumentality are
widely valued. Females, in contrast, are ‘‘wonderful but weak,” in
other words, women are more likeable, but clearly subordinate.
Across a variety of cultures, being male is equated with social status, and this fact leads to real gender inequality. Research based on
a broad international sample found that where the stereotype of
men as ‘‘bad but bold” was most pronounced, women suffered
from lower literacy rates, held less prestigious jobs and had lower
incomes (Glick et al., 2004).
Recently, Murnen et al. (2007) conducted a meta-analysis investigating the theory that the patriarchal structure of society supports sexual violence against women. They analyzed data from
39 studies related to masculine ideology and sexual aggression. Results showed evidence for a consistent relationship between measures of stereotypical male dominance and sexual aggression.
Perpetuating images of men as dominant and aggressive and women as demeaned supports violence against women.
Burt’s (1980) classic work on Rape Myth Acceptance (RMA)
raised consciousness about how cultural myths support rape. Rape
myths are false stereotypes about rape, such as the idea that women secretly enjoy rape. Burt (1980) said that rape is the logical
outcome of a partriarchal social structure. In essence, rape myths

1403

are ‘‘cognitive justiﬁcations for sexual aggression,” that ‘‘create a
climate that allows rape to occur” (Murnen et al., 2007, p. 362;
see also Looby, 2001; Mastronardi, 2003; Stark, 2007).
The theme that emerges from these theories is one of a social
hierarchy where masculinity is hegemonic: where men dominate
and women are subjugated. The most important theoretical factor
here is social power. When the media presents demeaned images
of women, they encourage the use of power against women. That
can mean physical or sexual aggression or sexual harassment in
the workplace or school.
Media effects studies pertaining to rape and sexual harassment
The primary reason for the current investigation is that it meaningfully extends the video game violence literature to the arena of
violence against women; no such study currently exists in the literature. However, there are studies showing a causal connection
between sexist representations in other forms of media and variables relevant to violence against women. Milburn, Mather, and
Conrad (2000) exposed male and female college students to either
a control ﬁlm or a 22-min compilation of scenes rated in a pre-test
to be non-violent but to sexually degrade and objectify women.
Results showed that males who viewed the degraded, objectiﬁed
women were more likely to endorse rape myths.
Johnson, Adams, Ashburn, and Reed (1995) studied the effects
of exposure to non-violent, but degraded and objectiﬁed women
in rap videos on male and female adolescents using a treatment
group and a no-treatment control. Results showed a signiﬁcant
interaction between ﬁlm exposure and gender on acceptance of
violence against women. While boys’ acceptance of violence
against women was not altered by the manipulation, girls who
watched the non-violent but degrading rap videos showed signiﬁcantly more acceptance of dating violence than girls who did not
see the videos (see also Lanis & Covell, 1995). This study shows
that when girls see women demeaned in the media, they are more
accepting of dating violence.

Sexual harassment
Sexual harassment (SH) encompasses a wide variety of behaviors
and can range in severity from degrading remarks to unwanted
sexual advances and sexual assault. Statistics indicate that SH is
widespread in high schools, colleges, and in the workplace. About
40–50% of women and girls in these settings who were surveyed reported experiencing sexual harassment (Crawford & Unger, 2004).
Like rape, SH was once miscast as sexually motivated behavior,
but is now understood as aggressive behavior (O’Leary-Kelly, Paetzold, & Grifﬁn, 2000). SH harms victims in a variety of ways
including emotionally and physically. In the job or university
setting, it can also result in economic sanctions and limits on
advancement (Looby, 2001). As with domestic violence against
women, men who harass often do so to coerce women and exercise
power and control over them (Looby, 2001; Stark, 2007).
To what extent are speciﬁc negative media stereotypes applied to other women? Ferguson and colleagues (2005) exposed
participants to either promiscuous or non-promiscuous women
taken from tapes of the Jerry Springer Show. Later, they read a
sexual harassment scenario and rated the promiscuity of the female victim. Results showed that those who saw the promiscuous women on Jerry Springer rated the sexual harassment victim
as less traumatized and more responsible for the harassment
than did participants in the control condition. Furthermore, the
authors demonstrated that it was the act of stereotype application—of attributing promiscuity to women other than those seen
on Jerry Springer—that caused them to blame an unrelated victim

Author's personal copy

1404

K.E. Dill et al. / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44 (2008) 1402–1408

of sexual harassment. The conclusion: when people generalize
lessons learned from sexist media images, unrelated women
may suffer the consequences.
The current investigation
We investigated the effects of sexist video game content (macho,
aggressive males and objectiﬁed females) on two outcomes: (1)
sexual harassment judgments and (2) rape-supportive attitudes,
described below. We also measured chronic exposure to video
game violence and related this factor to sexual harassment judgments and rape-supportive attitudes. Ferguson et al. (2005) noted
‘‘there has been little empirical research on how the mass media
might affect perceptions of sexual harassment” (p. 479). To add to
this media effects literature, we designed our own instrument for
the present study, which included a real-life account of sexual
harassment between a college student and a professor and a series
of judgments about this account. Our hypotheses were as follows:
H1: Exposure to images of sex-typed video game characters
(macho, aggressive males and objectiﬁed females) will result in
greater tolerance of sexual harassment.
Ferguson et al. (2005, p. 480) reported that there have been
studies showing gender effects on sexual harassment judgments,
studies showing no gender effects and studies showing mixed results. Citing these studies as precedent, they made no gender predictions for their sexual harassment outcomes. Based on this
rationale, we also made no gender predictions. However, we frame
this as a research question:
RQ1: How will gender inﬂuence sexual harassment judgments
and how will gender interact with exposure to images of sex-typed
video game characters?
H2: Exposure to images of sex-typed video game characters
(macho, aggressive males and objectiﬁed females) will cause
increases in rape supportive attitudes.
Johnson et al. (1995) showed that viewing objectiﬁed women
did not change males’ level of support for dating violence.
However, Lanis and Covell (1995) found that viewing objectiﬁed
women increased male’s rape and violence-supportive beliefs,
but that viewing both objectiﬁed and progressive images of
women decreased female’s judgments on these same outcomes.
Clearly, gender effects in this domain are complex. We therefore
made no predictions about gender effects for H2. Again, we frame
this as a research question:
RQ2: How will gender inﬂuence rape-supportive attitudes and
how will gender interact with exposure to images of sex-typed
video game characters?
One known investigation (Dill, 2008) demonstrated a correlation between violent video game exposure and RMA and negative
attitudes towards women. Extending this research, we propose:
H3: Participants’ self-reported exposure to violent video games
will correlate negatively with progressive sexual harassment
judgments.
H4: Participants’ self-reported exposure to violent video games
will correlate positively with rape-supportive attitudes.

Methods
Participants
Participants (N = 181; 120 females, 61 males; mean age 18.82
years) were students at a private liberal arts college in North Carolina enrolled in an introductory psychology course. The four available sections of introductory psychology (ranging in size from 17
to 32 students) were randomly assigned to either the experimental
or control conditions.

Procedure
After signing a consent form, participants received instructions
and then viewed one of two PowerPoint presentations, containing
either the experimental or the control images. To increase task focus, we told participants that, at the end of the study, we would
test their memory for the images they viewed and that those scoring highest on this memory test would be eligible to win a $25 gift
certiﬁcate to a popular store. Participants completed the questionnaires, presented in one of two random orders to control for order
effects, and were debriefed. During the entire experiment, care was
taken to ensure they were neither exchanging information nor discussing the images. Gift certiﬁcates were awarded as promised.
Experimental manipulation
The experimental group viewed a PowerPoint presentation of
images of sex-typed video game characters similar to those described by Dill and Thill (2007). The games covered in the presentations included GTA: Vice City, GTA: San Andreas, Dead or Alive
Xtreme Beach Volleyball 2, BMX XXX, Saint’s Row, Resident Evil and
Gears of War. See Fig. 1 for an example image.
Control group participants viewed press photos of current US senators and congresspersons—half male and half female (see Fig. 1). Our
goal was to present images of both men and women as respected professionals. Both PowerPoint presentations were set to automatically
display each image for ten seconds and to continuously loop for a total
of ten minutes. The experimental and the control presentations each
had a total of 32 images (16 males and 16 females).
It is important to note that, theoretically, these stimuli served as
both a manipulation and as a prime. As previous research shows
(Dill & Thill, 2007, Study 2), college students are aware of sexist
stereotypes in video games. Seeing only the images presented in
this study should affect participants. However, because most
American youth have grown up in the video game culture, the
images in the experimental condition also serve as a prime for all
the other sexist images of video game characters they have seen
in their lifetimes, thus making the manipulation more powerful.
Materials
Sexual harassment judgments
The authors created a measure of sexual harassment judgments
(SHJ) for the current investigation (see Appendix). Participants read
a real-life story of sexual harassment perpetrated by a male college
professor against a female student. This was adapted from The Silent
Treatment by Naomi Wolf (2004). The scenario was chosen in part for
its complexity and ambiguity. The nuances of the social situation described create a story that is more open for interpretation and therefore offers what we hope is a more sensitive measure of sexual
harassment. Subjects responded to seven questions about their
judgments of the event. Participants rated the incident as constituting sexual harassment and as a serious and damaging offense. They
also reported their empathy for the victim, and the extent to which
they blamed the victim. Two items measured their choice of punishment for the perpetrator. The entire measure is included in the
Appendix. We crafted the judgment questions to be open, balanced,
and not leading. For example, rather than asking simply ‘‘Is this sexual harassment?” we asked, ‘‘If the student’s story is true, would you
personally believe that Prof. Bloom is guilty of sexual harassment?”
We created a sexual harassment composite score by summing
scores on the seven-item scale. Six of the items used 0–9 scales.
Each punishment checklist item was assigned a value from 0 to
7. The ﬁnal composite score could range from 0 to 61. Higher
scores indicated more progressive sexual harassment judgments
(SHJ). Scale reliability was .786 based on a sample size of 179
(two participants were excluded due to missing data).

Author's personal copy

K.E. Dill et al. / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44 (2008) 1402–1408

1405

Fig. 1. Two stimuli used in the current investigation: A stereotypical (experimental) female (Left) and a professional (control) female (Right). The videogame image is a screen
shot from the video game BMX XXX published in 2002 by Acclaim Entertainment. The professional image is Senator Mary Landrieu (D-La) – http://landrieu.senate.gov/.

Rape-supportive attitudes. The 20-item short form of Muehlenhard and Felt’s (1998) Sexual Beliefs Scale is designed to measure speciﬁc attitudes linked to violence against women. These
attitudes, organized into ﬁve subscales include the following
content areas: Leading On Justiﬁes Force, Token Refusals, Women Like Force, No Means Stop, and Men Should Dominate. This
scale is far less commonly used than Burt’s (1980) measure of
RMA and thus will provide new data to the literature on media
violence effects generally, and video game violence and stereotype effects speciﬁcally. Reliability statistics (alphas) for these
subscales were good, ranging from .714 (Token Refusals) to
.944 (No Means Stop).
Composite scores of the twenty-item Sexual Beliefs Scale could
range from 0 to 60 with higher scores indicating greater rape supportive beliefs. Scale reliability was .834 based on a sample size of
180 (one participant was excluded due to missing data).
Video game questionnaire-Checklist version (VGQ-C). We created a
simpliﬁed version of Anderson and Dill’s (2000) measure of violent
video game play. We asked ‘‘Which type of video games do you play
most often?” Participants responded by checking all game types that
applied from the following list: action, ﬁrst-person shooter, sports,
ﬁghting, adventure, strategy, role playing game, puzzle, racing, music and dancing. They then rated how often they play video games on
a scale ranging from 0 (never) to 5 (often). They also indicated how
many hours per weekday and per weekend day they typically play
video games. We calculated Violent Video Game Exposure (VVGE)
by adding together the number of violent video games (action, ﬁrst
person shooter, and ﬁghting) and multiplying that by how often
the subjects played video games.
Results
Full factorial models for sexual harassment judgments and rapesupportive attitudes
First, we ran a full factorial ANOVA with the experimental
manipulation (Media Content: Sex-Typed Video game Images vs.
Professional Images) and sex of subject as independent variables

and the composite score for sexual harassment judgments as the
dependent variable. Results indicated a main effect of the Media
Content variable (F(1, 175) = 4.15, p < .05, g2 = .023) and a main effect of sex (F(1, 175) = 13.63, p < .0001, g2=.072). There was also a
signiﬁcant interaction between Media Content and sex of subject
(F(1, 175) = 9.33, p < .01, g2 = .051). Tolerance for sexual harassment was greatest for males in the Stereotypical group
(M = 41.0), followed by males in the control group (M = 47.64),
and females in the control group (M = 48.47). The group with the
least tolerant attitudes towards sexual harassment were the
females in the Stereotypical group (M = 49.8) (Fig. 2).
Based on the observed pattern of means, we ran a 3-to-1
contrast to determine if males in the Stereotypical group scored
signiﬁcantly lower than the other three groups. This 3-to-1
contrast was signiﬁcant (t(175) = 4.667, p < .001). Post-hoc
comparisons also revealed a signiﬁcant difference between males
in the Stereotypical and Professional groups (mean difference = 6.64, p < .002), but not between females in the Stereotypical
and Professional groups (mean difference = 1.33, p > .05).
Next we ran the same full factorial model, but with Rape-Supportive Attitudes as the dependent measure. The only signiﬁcant
factor in this model was sex of subject (F(1, 176) = 16.72,
p < .0001, g2=.087) with males (M = 1.08) scoring signiﬁcantly
higher on the Rape-Supportive Attitudes measure than females
(M = 0.84).
Video game violence exposure (VVGE). Males reported playing
video games an average of 7.26 h per week, while females played
an average of 2.71 h per week. Composite scores of the VVGE
variable indicated that males (M = 4.0) reported playing
signiﬁcantly more violent video games than did females
(M = .6833), (F(1, 177) = 60.45, p < .0001, g2=.255).
First we ran correlations and found, as hypothesized, that some
signiﬁcant relationships did exist between VVGE and our outcome
measures. Speciﬁcally, VVGE was negatively correlated with sexual
harassment judgments (r = .232, p < .001) such that those with
more reported long-term exposure to violent video games increased tolerance towards sexual harassment. Also, VVGE was signiﬁcantly correlated with Rape Supportive Attitudes, r = .239,

Author's personal copy

Sexual harassment judgments

1406

K.E. Dill et al. / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44 (2008) 1402–1408

search should examine the possibilities surrounding the notion
that exposure to common stereotypes of men and women in video
games might fuel adversarial relations between men and women.

50

Men
Women

49
48

Long-term versus short-term exposure

47
46
45
44
43
42
41
40

Stereotypical

Professional

Media content group
Fig. 2. Sexual harassment judgments as a function of media content exposure
(Stereotypical or Professional) and participant sex. The scale for sexual harassment
judgments ranged from 0 (least progressive) to 61 (most progressive).

p < .001. Subjects with higher violent video game exposure showed
greater Rape Supportive Attitudes. We then ran these same correlations using exposure only to ﬁrst person shooter games. Results
indicated slightly larger correlations between exposure to ﬁrst person shooter games and sexual harassment judgments (r = .327,
p < .001) and Rape Supportive Attitudes (r = .256, p < .0001).
Next we added VVGE (both the general composite and the shooter games variable) as an independent variable to the full factorial
ANOVAs reported above to determine if more complex relationships could be demonstrated. Results indicated no signiﬁcant
effects of VVGE either on sexual harassment judgments or on
Rape-Supportive Attitudes (p > .05). However, the other results
reported above remained essentially unchanged.
Discussion
Results indicate support for H1—that a short-term experimental
manipulation of exposure to media content (sex-typed images
versus professional images) altered judgments about sexual
harassment. Detailed analysis revealed that males who saw the
sex-typed images were most tolerant of sexual harassment when
judging a real-life case of sexual harassment between a female college student and her male professor. There was no experimental
support for H2 in that sex of subject was the only signiﬁcant
variable in the full factorial analysis.
Media exposure interaction with sex on sexual harassment judgments
An intriguing ﬁnding that resulted from this investigation was
the signiﬁcant interaction that occurred with the sexual harassment judgments. Analyses revealed that men showed a greater tolerance for sexual harassment of a young woman by an older man
(her professor). Most interestingly, the males who were exposed
to the objectiﬁed female video game characters were the most tolerant of any of the groups towards sexual harassment. Furthermore, the trend was for the females who were exposed to these
same demeaning and objectiﬁed images of women to react by
decreasing their tolerance for sexual harassment—even compared
to women who had just seen empowered female political ﬁgures.
This may be because when women see that they are being stereotyped as lesser than men—as objectiﬁed and demeaned compared
to powerful men—they are energized to advocate for the just treatment of women. Taken together then, media images of demeaned
women cause men to advocate keeping women ‘‘in their place,”
while they cause women to advocate for social justice. Future re-

Although more complex models did not indicate signiﬁcant
effects of long-term exposure to video game violence, simpler
correlational analyses did reveal signiﬁcant relationships between long-term violent video game exposure and less progressive sexual harassment judgments and greater rape supportive
attitudes. These correlations are similar to those reported in earlier research (Dill, 2008). It may be that the checklist measure of
long-term video game violence exposure used here is a weaker
measure than the game-listing version used in a variety of other
investigations. Furthermore, there is a difference between the
still images used in the experimental manipulation and the live
action game content that the long-term measure represents.
While these results add to the very small literature correlating
long-term exposure to video game violence with attitudes supporting violence against women, more research is needed to elucidate these relationships.
The experimental and control groups
In this experiment, we designed the experimental versus control conditions in a unique way. A textbook experimental versus
control condition would have been more convincingly achieved
by comparing video game characters that were sex-typed with
those who were not. That design has clear strengths. In the present
study, our two conditions were designed to differ from each other
on the dimension of the social status of women: namely whether
the females were presented as demeaned and objectiﬁed (disrespected) versus as positive and professional (respected). Also the
males were strong in both conditions, but they were stereotypically manly (most notably, aggressive) in the sex-typed condition,
but, like the women, were respectable professionals in the comparison condition. These categories were inspired by the work of Lanis
and Covell (1995) on magazine images of demeaned versus
esteemed women and also by the theories described above. A critical theoretical variable in the representation of women is social
status. A common thread in research on media and women is that
women suffer from representations that demean them as compared to men. These themes are present in Hegemonic Masculinity
Theory and in Ambivalent Sexism Theory. They are also relevant to
research on representations of women in pornography and its
relationship to violence against women. We believe our conditions
spoke to what was theoretically most important.
There is also a practical aspect to media research that was
important in guiding our design of the experimental and control
conditions. As past research in our lab has shown (Dill & Thill,
2007, Study 2) the vast majority of male video game characters
are aggressive and manly in the sense of hegemonic masculinity
(including social power and dominance). Most female video game
characters are objectiﬁed and demeaned. These are sex-role stereotypes that youth are exposed to in real life. Therefore they represent their real experiences with socialization better than would
the creation of artiﬁcial avatars. As an example of this point, in earlier research in our lab we attempted to measure positive behavior
enacted by video game characters. Unfortunately, we found few
positive behaviors to code. When research assistants started asking
whether an armed male video game character assisting another
character to break out of prison could be coded as a positive behavior, it was clear that true positive behaviors were scarce. On the
other hand, it is encouraging to note that people really are exposed
to examples of respected male and female professionals such as the

Author's personal copy

1407

K.E. Dill et al. / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44 (2008) 1402–1408

actual congresspersons we showed our subjects. In that sense, our
study had greater validity than would artiﬁcially created avatars.
In the end, we believe we demonstrated a difference between
how men and women reacted when exposed to negative, sextyped images versus professional images—both of which were
realistic in their own ways. We know they behaved differently
from each other but not how they would have behaved compared
to a no treatment control group or a control group that was
designed differently. It does remain a weakness of the design that
the congresspersons were real people and the video game characters were not. Could we have designed or located avatars that
would have evoked the kind of success and respect one attributes
to senators? Especially because there is so little published
research in this area, future research will add to our body of
knowledge in this regard. One important outcome this research
demonstrates is that exposure to different kinds of media images
of women changes the level of tolerance some people have for
judgments and attitudes relevant to violence against women.
For example, exposure to demeaning images of women may
cause males to be more tolerant of sexual harassment towards
women in their workplace or school.
A strength of this investigation is that it is the ﬁrst experimental
investigation of short-term exposure to negative sex role stereotypes of video game characters. It extends the video game violence
effects literature into the domain of aggression against women.
These experimental results on sexual harassment judgments also
have real world consequences since males are more likely than
females to play violent video games, and since men are often in
positions of power. Our results suggest that men may disregard
women’s reports of sexual harassment, blame the victim and
assign weaker punishments to perpetrators, thus condoning sexual
harassment and punishing victims. Sexual harassment is both a
form of aggression against women and a form of gender discrimination and is a serious and widespread social problem. Given the
popularity of video games, especially among young men, and the
typicality of sex role stereotypes in games and game magazines,
the effects reported here are important.
Past research has shown that when sexual harassment involved
a man touching a woman, ratings of the harassment tended to be
uniformly high, whereas verbal harassment scores were affected
by exposure to negative female stereotypes in the media (Ferguson
et al., 2005). The scenario employed in our study (see Appendix)
involved a male professor putting his hand on a female student’s
thigh. The victim was a high-achieving, independent-minded
female student. Past research (Berndahl, 2007; Maass, Cadinu,
Guarniari, & Grasselli, 2003) indicates that men are more likely
to sexually harass so-called ‘‘uppity” (independent, androgynous)
women and feminist women. Our research therefore adds to this
literature. Future research should address what characteristics of
harassment scenarios are sensitive to manipulations of sex-stereotyped content.
Within the context of the General Aggression Model (Anderson
et al., 2007), the stimuli used in this study presumably primed
associated thoughts. In the experimental group, this included
knowledge structures relevant to a male-dominated socio-cultural
structure. Though we did not measure affect, priming may also
have activated associated affect. Future research could test
whether these types of stimuli evoke affective responses and
whether they mediate or moderate attitudinal and/or behavioral
outcomes.
Video game images and stories are a dynamic part of our
social worlds, providing information about what we should or
could do, think and feel. Even young people who are not avid
gamers are familiar with gender stereotypes in video games
(Dill & Thill, 2007) but, at the same time, do not believe their
attitudes and behaviors are negatively inﬂuenced by exposure

to these stereotypes (Brenick, Henning, Killen, O’Connor, & Collins, 2007). The current investigation calls those attitudes into
question and suggests an important line of inquiry for future
research.
Appendix Social. attitudes questionnaire
From ‘‘The Silent
newyorkmetro.com

Treatment”

by

Naomi

Wolf—from

Instructions: The following story is about a student’s experiences
with one of her college professors. Please read the story and answer the questions that follow it.
‘‘. . .What actually happened in late fall, 1983? I was a senior,
majoring in English. Harold Bloom was one of Yale’s most illustrious professors. . ..
I, personally, was at once drawn to him intellectually and
slightly scared of him. I had audited a famous course he taught,
and he had reached out to me then and invited me to talk with
him. Since he was so intellectually selective, I was ‘‘sick with
excitement” at the prospect. . .
Bloom agreed to meet with me weekly. At my adviser’s suggestion, he wrote me a letter of reference for my Rhodes Scholarship
application. Then I could not get a meeting with him. The semester
was slipping away. . .Finally, Bloom suggested that he come to the
house I shared with one of his editorial assistants and her boyfriend. At dinnertime. I agreed.
The four of us ate a meal. He had, as promised, brought a
bottle of Amontillado, which he drank continually. I also drank.
We had set out candles—a grown-up occasion. The others eventually left and—ﬁnally!—I thought we could discuss my poetry
manuscript. I set it between us. He did not open it. He did
not look at it. He leaned toward me and put his face inches
from mine. ‘‘You have the aura of election upon you,” he
breathed.
I hoped he was talking about my poetry. I moved back and took
the manuscript and turned it around so he could read.
The next thing I knew, his heavy, boneless hand was hot on my
thigh.
I lurched away. ‘‘This is not what I meant,” I stammered. The
whole thing had suddenly taken on the quality of a bad horror ﬁlm.
The ﬂoor spun. By now my back was against the sink, which was as
far away as I could get. He moved toward me. I turned away from
him toward the sink and found myself vomiting. Bloom
disappeared.
When he reemerged—from the bedroom with his coat—a
moment later, I was still frozen, my back against the sink.
He said: ‘‘You are a deeply troubled girl.” Then he went to
the table, took the rest of his sherry, corked the bottle, and
left.”
Circle your answer on the scales below:
1) If the student’s story is true, would you personally believe that
Prof. Bloom is guilty of sexual harassment?
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Not at all guilty
Deﬁnitely guilty

2) If Prof. Bloom admitted doing what the student accused him of
doing, how harshly do you think he should be punished?
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
No punishment
Severe punishment
3) If the story about Prof. Bloom is true, which of the following punishments do you think the he would deserve? Assume they are in
order from least to greatest punishment. (Check one).

Author's personal copy

1408

K.E. Dill et al. / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44 (2008) 1402–1408

_
_
_
_
_

No punishment
being asked to apologize to the student
being given a verbal reprimand from his supervisor
being given a written reprimand from his supervisor
being warned that repeating this type of behavior may
result in his getting ﬁred in the future
_ being forced to take time off his job without pay
_ being ﬁred from his job
4) To what extent do you think the student is to blame for the
professor touching her thigh? In other words, did the student do
something to cause the professor’s behavior?
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Clearly
Not at all
responsible for
responsible for
Professor’s
Professor’s
behavior
behavior

5) Should the student’s complaint be taken seriously?
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
No her complaint
Yes, her complaint
is trivial
is serious

6) Do you feel sorry for the student in the story?
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
No, not at all sorry

9
Yes, very sorry

7) How damaging do you think professor’s behavior was to the
student?
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Not at all damaging
Very damaging

References
Anderson, C. A., Berkowitz, L., Donnerstein, E., Huesmann, L. R., Johnson, J. D., Linz,
D., et al. (2003). The inﬂuence of media violence on youth. Psychological Science
in the Public Interest, 4(3), 81–110.
Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B. J. (2001). Effects of violent video games on aggressive
behavior, aggressive cognition, aggressive affect, physiological arousal, and
prosocial behavior: A metaanalytic review of the scientiﬁc literature.
Psychological Science, 12, 353–359.
Anderson, C. A., & Dill, K. E. (2000). Video games and aggressive thoughts, feelings,
and behavior in the laboratory and in life. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 78, 772–790.
Anderson, C. A., Gentile, D. A., & Buckley, K. E. (2007). Violent video game effects on
children and adolescents. New York: Oxford.
Bartholow, B. D., Sestir, M. A., & Davis, E. (2005). Correlates and consequences of
exposure to video game violence: Hostile personality, empathy, and aggressive
behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 1573–1586.
Berndahl, J. (2007). Sexual harassment of uppity women. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 92, 425–437.
Brenick, A., Henning, A., Killen, M., O’Connor, A., & Collins, M. (2007). Social
reasoning about stereotypic images in video games: Unfair, legitimate, or ‘‘just
entertainment”? Youth and Society, 38, 395–419.
Burgess, M. C. R., Stermer, S. P., & Burgess, S. R. (2007). Sex, lies, and videogames:
The portrayal of male and female characters on videogame covers. Sex Roles, 57,
419–433.

Burt, M. (1980). Cultural myths and supports for rape. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 38, 217–230.
Connell, R. W. (1987). Gender and power. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Crawford, M., & Unger, R. (2004). Women and gender: A feminist psychology. Boston:
McGraw-Hill.
Dill, K. E. (2008). Do anti-social video games foster sexism and violence against
women? A study of pro-rape, anti-women attitudes among gamers. [Under
contract to be published by Greenwood Press in Violence against women in
families and relationships edited by Evan Stark and Eve S. Buzawa].
Dill, K. E., Gentile, D. A., Richter, W. A., & Dill, J. C. (2005). Violence, sex, race, and age
in video games: A content analysis. In E. Cole & J. Henderson Daniel (Eds.),
Featuring females: Feminist analyses of the media. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Dill, K. E., & Thill, K. P. (2007). Video game characters and the socialization of gender
roles: Young people’s perceptions mirror sexist media depictions. Sex Roles, 57,
851–865.
Ferguson, T., Berlin, J., Noles, E., Johnson, J., Reed, W., & Spicer, C. V. (2005). Variation
in the application of the ‘‘promiscuous female” stereotype and the nature of the
application domain: Inﬂuences on sexual harassment judgments after exposure
to the Jerry Springer Show. Sex Roles, 52, 477–487.
Funk, J. B., Germann, J. N., & Buchman, D. D. (2000). Preference for violent electronic
games, self-concept and gender differences in young children. American Journal
of Orthopsychiatry, 70, 233–241.
Glick, P., Fiske, S. T., Masser, B., Manganelli, A. M., Huang, L., Castro, Y. R., et al.
. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 713–772.
Johnson, J. D., Adams, M. S., Ashburn, L., & Reed, R. (1995). Differential gender effects
on exposure to rap music on African-American adolescents’ acceptance of teen
dating violence. Sex Roles, 33, 597–606.
Lanis, K., & Covell, C. (1995). Images of women in advertisements: Effects on
attitudes related to sexual aggression. Sex Roles, 32, 639–649.
Looby, E. J. (2001). The violence of sexual harassment: Physical, emotional and
economic victimization. In D. S. Sandhu (Ed.), Faces of violence: Psychological
correlates concepts and intervention strategies. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science.
Lull, J. (2003). Hegemony. In G. Dines & J. M. Humez (Eds.), Gender race, and class in
media: A text reader. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Malamuth, N. M., Heavy, C. L., & Linz, D. (1993). Predicting men’s antisocial behavior
against women: The interaction model of sexual aggression. In R. Hirshman, G.
Hall, & J. Graham (Eds.), Sexual aggression: Issues in etiology, assessment and
treatment. Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis.
Maass, A., Cadinu, M., Guarniari, G., & Grasselli, A. (2003). Sexual harassment under
social identity threat: The computer harassment paradigm. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 85, 853–870.
Mastronardi, M. (2003). Adolescence and media. Journal of Language and Social
Psychology, 22(1), 83–93.
Mikula, M. (2003). Gender and video games: The political valency of Lara Croft.
Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 17(1), 79–87.
Milburn, M. A., Mather, R., & Conrad, S. D. (2000). The effects of viewing R-rated
movie scenes that objectify women on perceptions of date rape. Sex Roles, 43,
645–664.
Muehlenhard, C. L., & Felts, A. S. (1998). Sexual beliefs scale. In C. M. Davis, W. L.
Yarber, R. Bauserman, G. Schreer, & S. L. Davis (Eds.), Handbook of sexualityrelated measures. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Murnen, S. K., Wright, C., & Kaluzny, G. (2007). If boys will be boys, then girls will be
victims? A meta-analytic review of the research that relates masculine ideology
to sexual aggression. Sex Roles, 46, 359–375.
O’Leary-Kelly, A. M., Paetzold, R. L., & Grifﬁn, R. W. (2000). Sexual harassment as
aggressive behavior: An actor-based perspective. Academy of Management
Review, 25, 372–388.
Scharrer, E. (2004). Virtual violence: Gender and aggression in video game
advertisements. Mass Communication and Society, 7, 393–412.
Scharrer, E. (2005). Hypermasculinity, aggression and television violence: An
experiment. Media Psychology, 7, 353–376.
Stark, E. (2007). Coercive control. New York: Oxford.
Top 25 PS2 Games of All Time: You are Not E for Our Countdown of the Coolest Sony
Software There Is (2007, March). Retrieved July 5, 2007 from http://ps2.ign.com/
articles/772/772296p3.html.
Vargas, J. A. (2007). Shadow Player. Washington Post [online edition], Retrieved July
5, 2007 from http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/
05/10/AR2006051002449.html.
Walsh, D., Gentile, D. A., VanOverbeke, M., & Chasco, E. (2002). Mediawise video
game
report
card.
Retreived
January
15,
2003,
from
http://
www.mediafamily.org/research/report_vgrc_2002-2.shtml.
Wolf, N. (2004). The Silent Treatment. New York Magazine, Retrieved August 23,
2007 from http://nymag.com/nymetro/news/features/n_9932/.

