Development and Psychopathology, 14 (2002), 91–105
Copyright  2002 Cambridge University Press
Printed in the United States of America

Peer to peer sexual harassment
in early adolescence:
A developmental perspective

LOREN E. MCMASTER,a JENNIFER CONNOLLY,a DEBRA PEPLER,a
WENDY M. CRAIGb

AND

a

York University; and bQueen’s University

Abstract
The goal of this study was to examine sexual harassment in early adolescence. Available data indicate that peer to
peer sexual harassment is prevalent in high school and is associated with psychosocial problems for both victims
and perpetrators. For the present study, we adopted a developmental contextual model to examine the possibility that
this behavior develops during the late elementary and middle school years and is linked to the biological and social
changes that occur at this time. Youths from Grades 6–8 (N = 1,213) enrolled in seven elementary and middle
schools in a large south-central Canadian city were asked to report on their sexual harassment behaviors with sameand cross-gender peers; their pubertal development, and the gender composition of their peer network. The results
revealed that cross-gender harassment was distinct from same-gender harassment, increased in frequency from Grade
6 to Grade 8, and was linked to pubertal maturation and participation in mixed-gender peer groups. The implications
of a developmental contextual model for understanding the emergence of this problematic behavior in adolescence
are discussed.

Peer to peer sexual harassment is a pervasive
problem among adolescents. Across the high
school grades, 84% of adolescents report that
they have experienced sexual harassment at
some point in their school lives, and they report that the vast majority of the harassment
was perpetrated by peers (American Association of University Women [AAUW], 1993;

Connecticut Permanent Commission on the
Status of Women [PCSW], 1995; Fineran &
Bennett, 1997; Ontario Secondary Schools
Teacher’s Federation, Ontario Women’s Directorate, Ministry of Education and Training,
1995; Roscoe, Strouse & Goodwin, 1994).
Despite the pervasiveness of sexual harassment among high school students and its negative effects for both victims and perpetrators,
little is known about how or when this behavior develops. Adopting a developmental contextual perspective, the goal of the present
study was to investigate the perpetration of
sexual harassment in the years preceding high
school and to examine its links to the pubertal
and social transitions of early adolescence.
Sexual harassment is a construct that invites controversy because of the wide variation in how it is defined by researchers in the
field. As O’Donohue has recently concluded,
“Definitions of sexual harassment agree on
only one semantic issue: that sexual harass-

The authors wish to thank the students and staff of the
participating schools who generously gave their time to
this study. Portions of this article were presented at the
meetings of the Society for Research in Child Development, Washington, April 1997, and at the meetings of the
Canadian Psychological Association, Toronto, June 1997.
The research was partially supported by grants from the
Ontario Mental Health Foundation awarded to the second, third and fourth authors, and by a Social Science
and Humanities Research Council of Canada Studentship
awarded to the first author.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Loren McMaster, Child and Adolescent Services Association, Suite 406, 10011–109 Street, Edmonton, AB, T5J
3S8, Canada; E-mail: lmcmaster@casaservices.org.

91

92

ment is improper behavior that has a sexual
dimension” (O’Donohue, Downs, & Yeater,
1999, p. 112). A universally accepted definition of sexual harassment has been difficult to
generate because of the diverse legal, sociological, feminist, and psychological perspectives from which the issue has been
examined. In the current study, we use a behavioral–psychological definition of sexual
harassment as unwanted sexual attention. This
definition is behavioral, in that specific behaviors constituting harassment are defined,
and psychological, in that the target’s perception or interpretation of behavior is salient.
This definition of harassment is a broad one
and includes not only severe behaviors such
as sexual assault but also what Wise and Stanley (1987) have labeled the “dripping tap” behaviors, such as sexual jokes and comments.
These minor harassment behaviors are so
common that they are often considered normal and mundane, yet there is reason to believe that even this level of sexual harassment
contains an element of risk for youths.
Adolescents who have been victims of peer
sexual harassment report that it made them reluctant to go to school, reluctant to talk in
class, inattentive at school, academically unmotivated, and led them to achieve lower
grades than they expected (AAUW, 1993).
Over 50% of female victims report feelings
of embarrassment and self-consciousness, and
over 35% report feeling afraid or scared
(AAUW, 1993). Larkin (1994) has argued
that the decline in self-esteem which occurs
in early adolescence for girls (AAUW, 1992;
Bush & Simmons, 1987) may be attributable,
at least in part, to the everyday sexual harassment that they are likely to experience. Perpetration of sexual harassment is also linked to
deleterious behaviors. Youths who reveal
high rates of dating violence are described by
their teachers as frequent perpetrators of sexual harassment (Wolfe, Wekerle, Reitzel–
Jaffe, & Lefebvre, 1998). In a similar vein,
domestic violence in young couples is often
preceded by verbal or psychological insults
(Murphy & O’Leary, 1989). These findings
suggest that there is some risk that perpetration of sexual harassment will persist for
some adolescents beyond the high school

L. E. McMaster et al.

years and may generalize to other relationships.
In contrast to previous studies that have
examined victimization and its impact
(AAUW, 1993; Lee et al., 1996; PCSW,
1995), the current study focuses on the perpetration of peer sexual harassment in early adolescence. We adopt a developmental contextual perspective and examine the occurrence
of this problematic behavior within the biological and social transitions of early adolescence (Cairns & Cairns, 1994; Cicchetti &
Aber, 1998; Lerner & Simi, 2000). Sexual harassment is neither normal nor socially appropriate, given its impact on victims and its
association with other aggressive behaviors.
Nonetheless, it is a behavior that may appear
normative because its emergence is linked to
developmental processes that occur during the
early adolescent period. This, in turn, may
lead to a minimization of its negative impact
on adolescent development. By studying sexual harassment in a developmental context,
we hope to establish a baseline framework of
harassment in early adolescence and the role
of developmental stressors in its occurrence.
As with other forms of adolescent misbehavior, examining the developmental context
may also lead to a greater understanding of
when such harassment is a temporary display
of problem activities or, for some adolescents,
when it is an expression of persistent behavior
problems (Caspi, Lynam, Moffitt, & Silva,
1993).
Pubertal development is a defining biological characteristic of early adolescence and
may be related to sexually harassing behavior.
Udry and colleagues (Smith, Udry, & Morris,
1985; Udry, 1990) have proposed two routes
by which the biological effects of puberty are
related to sexual behavior and similar effects
can be inferred for sexual harassment. First,
the development of secondary sex characteristics may signal to peers and adults that the
expression of sexual interest is developmentally appropriate. Second, pubertal increases
in sex hormones may directly affect sexual
motivation and interest (e.g., Halpern, Udry,
Campbell, Suchindran, & Mason, 1994; Halpern, Udry, & Suchindran, 1997; Udry, Talbert, & Morris, 1986) and may also lead to

Adolescent sexual harassment

sexual harassment. We believe that one developmental task of adolescence is learning to
express sexual desire in socially acceptable
ways and that some sexually harassing behaviors may often be crude or aggressive attempts by some early adolescents to express
developmentally appropriate sexual interest.
Hence, we propose that sexual harassment
emerges in the middle school years, in concert
with pubertal maturation that begins for most
youth at this time. If this is correct, then sexual harassment should increase in frequency
during the middle school years and this increase should be at least partially accounted
for by the pubertal changes occurring during
this developmental period.
Developmental changes occurring in the
social context of early adolescence may also
be linked to the emergence of sexual harassment. Dunphy (1963), based on his ethnographic research with peer groups of Australian youth, described a process in which
young adolescents form small, same-gender
cliques, and then, in midadolescence, these
same-gender cliques merge to form larger,
mixed-gender peer crowds. During this process, adolescents inevitably interact socially
with increasing numbers of cross-gender
peers. Consistent with Dunphy’s naturalistic
observations, early adolescence is marked by
a significant increase in the number of crossgender peers and the amount of contact with
them (Blyth, Hill, & Thiel, 1982; Feiring &
Lewis, 1991). This transformation of the peer
network has obvious implications for the occurrence of sexual harassment. Especially in
the early years of adolescence, when youths
differ in the rate at which they participate in
mixed-gender groups, those adolescents who
spend more time in the presence of cross-gender peers will have more opportunities to perpetrate sexual harassment. Transformations in
the gender composition of adolescents’ peer
networks, then, should be linked to increases
in the perpetration of sexual harassment.
A second goal of the current study was to
explore harassment between adolescents of
the same gender as well as harassment occurring across gender. Sexual harassment, defined as unwanted attention of a sexual nature,
can occur between both same- and cross-gen-

93

der peers, and the AAUW study (1993) established that many students’ reports of harassment included some from same-gender peers.
Currently we know very little about samegender harassment and how it differs from
cross-gender harassment. We propose that
same- and cross-gender harassment have distinct motivational, behavioral, and contextual
determinants. For the heterosexual majority of
adolescents, cross-gender harassment is motivated, at least in part, by sexual interest. In
contrast, for these adolescents same-gender
peer harassment is more likely to be an expression of verbal aggression. Second, given
their distinct motivations, same- and crossgender harassment are likely to have somewhat different behavioral forms: same-gender
harassment is likely to entail homophobic insults, jokes, name-calling, and rumor spreading, as well as physical behavior such as
might occur in hazing rituals. Cross-gender
harassment, on the other hand, is more likely
to entail behaviors which might be construed
as sexual advances. Finally, the biological and
social changes which create a developmental
context for the emergence of sexual harassment in early adolescence should be specific
to cross-gender harassment. Among predominantly heterosexual youths, pubertal maturation and mixed-gender peer groups can result
in increased motivation and opportunities for
cross-gender harassment. In contrast, samegender harassment is not expected to be associated with pubertal maturation, because we
believe that it is not sexually motivated. As
well, the early adolescent restructuring of the
peer network to include more cross-gender
peers should not alter opportunities for samegender harassment. Given the proposed links
to the developmental changes of early adolescence, we expect that cross-gender harassment increases during this time, while samegender harassment remains stable.
In summary, the hypotheses of the present
study were as follows: (a) perpetration of
same- and cross-gender harassment are distinct phenomena among early adolescents; (b)
cross-gender, but not same-gender, harassment increases in frequency across the early
years of adolescence; and (c) the increase observed in cross-gender harassment is linked to

94

the pubertal and social changes of early adolescence.
Method
Participants
The sample included 1,213 students (636
boys, 577 girls) enrolled in Grades 6–8 who
were attending one of seven elementary or
middle schools (kindergarten through Grade
8) in a large, south-central Canadian city.
There were 296 students in Grade 6 (mean
age 11.5 years, SD = .35), 411 in Grade 7
(mean age 12.5 years, SD = .34), and 506 in
Grade 8 (mean age 13.4 years, SD = .35). The
ethnic composition of the sample was 74%
White, 10% Asian, 4% Black, 3% South
Asian, 2% of mixed race, and 6% of other
ethnic groups. Eighty-two percent of the participants lived with both biological parents,
5% lived in step-families, 11% lived in single-parent families, and 2% lived in other arrangements. The sample was primarily middle
class: 66% of the participants’ parents were
high school graduates, with 53% of the parents completing university as well.
Attrition analysis
Consent to participate in the study was initially obtained from 1,261 students and their
parents. Of the 1,261 students who participated in the study, 1,213 provided data on
sexual harassment. Participants who provided
data on their sexual harassment behaviors
were similar to those who did not with respect
to gender, race, parents’ education, family
composition, and use of English in the home.
However, a t test revealed that nonresponders
to sexual harassment questions were significantly younger (M = 12.08 years, SD = .96)
than responders (M = 12.64 years, SD = .84),
t (1,259) = −4.48, p < .001. It is possible that
the students in the younger grades had more
difficulty understanding the harassment questions than did the older students.
Of the 1,261 participants, 87% (n = 1,098)
also provided data on their pubertal development. Those participants who did respond to
questions about their pubertal development

L. E. McMaster et al.

were similar to those who did not respond
with respect to grade, race, parents’ education, family composition, and use of English
in the home. However, significantly more
boys (93%) than girls (81%) answered these
questions, χ2 (1, N = 1,261) = 43.65, p < .001.
Girls may have found the questions about
their pubertal development more intrusive
than did boys and on that basis were more
likely to refuse. Therefore, results relating to
models that include pubertal development
must be interpreted somewhat more cautiously for girls than for boys.
Procedure
Trained assistants administered questionnaires
during regularly scheduled class periods. Participants were informed that the purpose of
the research was to increase our understanding of various aspects of relationships during
the transition to adolescence. Participants
were assured of confidentiality and reminded
of the voluntary nature of the research.
Measures
Sexual harassment. Sexual harassment was
measured using a modified version of the
AAUW Sexual Harassment Survey (AAUW,
1993), in which students reported how often
they had perpetrated a variety of sexual harassment behaviors. The questionnaire instructions explicitly stated that the students
were to report on only unwanted sexual behaviors. Although this study is focused on
perpetration, the questionnaire included identical items about how often the students had
experienced each behavior, so that the parallels between sexual harassment perpetration
and victimization could be examined.
Some modifications were made to the original AAUW survey. First, students were asked
to report on harassment involving peers only,
not school staff, and they were asked to report
on harassment occurring in the last 6 weeks,
rather than over their entire school lives. Second, the response rating scale was expanded
to 5 points, with the anchors ranging from 0
(never) to 4 (daily). Third, we removed five
behaviors from the original 14 items in the

Adolescent sexual harassment

scale: one that rarely occurs in the elementary
school context (i.e., “Spied on someone as
they dressed or showered at school”), two that
referred to behaviors fully captured by other
items in the survey (i.e., “Pulled someone’s
clothing off or down” and “Blocked someone’s way or cornered them in a sexual
way”), and two that referred to sexual coercion (i.e., “Forced someone to kiss you” and
“Forced someone to do something sexual
other than kissing”). The latter behaviors were
reported at very low frequency in a high
school sample (AAUW, 1993) and were therefore expected to contribute even less variance
in this sample. Fourth, upon consultation with
the Equity Studies Office of the participating
Board of Education we added the following
item: “Made comments about or rated the
parts of someone’s body that make them a
boy/girl.” The final set of 10 items is shown
in Table 1 in the order in which they appear
in the survey. Because of our interest in the
distinction between same-gender and crossgender harassment, the students were asked,
for each item, how often the behavior involved a peer of the same gender and how
often a peer of the other gender. Internal consistency was high for same-gender and crossgender perpetration (Cronbach’s α = .93 and
.94, respectively), and for same-gender and
cross-gender victimization (Cronbach’s α =
.89 and .92, respectively). Because the item
distributions were positively skewed, responses were dichotomized into 0 (never) and
1 (ever). The reliabilities for the harassment
scales based on dichotomous items were also
excellent (same-gender perpetration, α = .93;
cross-gender perpetration, α = .88; same-gender victimization, α = .75; cross-gender victimization, α = .84).
Pubertal maturation. The Pubertal Development Scale was administered to assess pubertal status and maturation of secondary sexual
characteristics (Petersen, Crockett, Richards,
& Boxer, 1988). On gender-specific versions
of the form, girls and boys rate the development of their secondary sex characteristics
(ranging from “not yet started” to “completed”), including pubic hair, growth spurt,
skin changes, facial hair, voice change, breast

95

development, and menarchial status. This
measure has been shown to have good reliability (Cronbach’s α for different samples
ranging from .68 to .83) and to correlate with
objective measures of pubertal development
(Petersen et al., 1988), including physicians’
ratings and age at peak height velocity. In the
present study, Cronbach’s α was .79 for the
boys and .76 for the girls. Since girls and boys
differ in rates of pubertal maturation, for the
purposes of analysis pubertal maturation
scores were standardized within gender.
Gender composition of peer networks. Participants were asked to fill out the Peer Network
Inventory (Connolly & Konarski, 1994), in
which they list up to 15 in-school peers in
their networks. Test–retest reliabilities for
network size (.72) and number of cross-gender peers listed (.76) have been previously reported (Connolly & Konarski, 1994; Maharaj & Connolly, 1994). To control for
differences in overall network size, gender
composition of adolescents’ peer networks
was computed by calculating the proportion
of listed peers who were cross-gender.
Results
Sexual harassment behaviors
in early adolescence
The percentages of participants who reported
each type of sexual harassment behavior at
least once in the last 6 weeks are shown in
Table 1. For both boys and girls, the three
behaviors most commonly perpetrated were
homophobic name-calling; making sexual
comments, jokes, gestures, looks; and making
comments or rating sexual body parts. For
both boys and girls, the three behaviors most
commonly experienced were homophobic namecalling; sexual comments, jokes, gestures,
looks; and being flashed or mooned. Chisquare tests were used to investigate gender
differences in each type of behavior. Note
that, due to our large sample size, for this and
all subsequent analyses we have set our Type
I error rate at p < .001. As indicated in Table
1, boys were more likely than girls to report
perpetrating 5 out of the 10 behaviors, while

96

*p < .0001 required by Bonferroni adjustment.

Made sexual comments, jokes, gestures, or looks
Touched, grabbed, or pinched in a sexual way
Brushed up against someone in a sexual way on purpose
Spread sexual rumors about someone
Pulled at someone’s clothing in a sexual way
Showed, gave, or left someone sexual pictures, photographs,
messages, or notes
Wrote sexual messages or graffitti (e.g., on bathroom walls,
in locker rooms, in a note or book) about someone
Called someone “fag,” “dyke,” “lezzie,” or “queer”
Flashed or “mooned” someone
Made comments about or rated the parts of someone’s body
that make them a boy or a girl

Behavior

Harassment Victimization

13
7
9
8
6
6
4
28
8
9

7
2
3
3
3
1
4
11
3
5

8.89

0.47
53.85*
13.53

22.90*

11.95
19.23*
21.14*
16.88*
9.95

10

3
11
14

4

22
8
9
8
5

9

5
26
13

10

18
10
12
10
9

0.87

3.24
48.53*
0.51

20.63*

3.88
0.45
3.77
1.36
5.62

Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
(n = 577) (n = 636) χ2 (1, N = 1,213) (n = 577) (n = 636) χ2 (1, N = 1,213)

Harassment Perpetration

Table 1. Percentages of boys and girls reporting sexual harassment behaviors

Adolescent sexual harassment

there were only two behaviors that boys were
significantly more likely than girls to report
experiencing (with Bonferroni adjustments requiring p < .0001).
Following the procedure of AAUW
(1993), a dichotomous sexual harassment perpetration variable was computed, with “0” assigned to those who reported no harassment
in the last 6 weeks and “1” assigned to those
who reported any harassment in the last 6
weeks. An identical variable was computed
for victimization. There was a significant
overlap between those who reported perpetration and those who reported victimization:
78% of perpetrators were also victims, and
56% of sexual harassment victims were also
perpetrators. Boys were significantly more
likely to report perpetration (36%) than were
girls (21%), χ2 (1, N = 1,213) = 30.28, p <
.001, but were equally likely to report victimization (boys, 42%; girls, 38%).
Same-gender and cross-gender
sexual harassment
To examine the hypothesis that same and
cross-gender harassment are distinct, we conducted a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA)
in which we predicted that the same- and
cross-gender sexual harassment items would
load on separate factors. Because individual
harassing behaviors were reported at very low
frequencies, the 10 items on the scale were
collapsed into three summary variables: a)
verbal harassment, b) visual harassment, and
c) physical harassment, separately for sameand cross-gender harassment. Since the distributions of these summary variables were positively skewed, they were dichotomized into 0
(never) and 1 (ever). The PRELIS software
program (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1988) was
used to calculate tetrachoric correlations and
asymptotic variance and covariance matrices.
These matrices were then used as the input in
the CFA using the method of weighted least
squares (WLS) in LISREL (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1989) to estimate free elements in the
factor loading matrix. The relative fit of two
models was then compared: (a) a one-factor
model in which same-gender and cross-gender variables were constrained to load on a

97

single factor, and (b) a two-factor model in
which same-gender and cross-gender variables were assigned to two separate factors.
Figure 1 depicts the two competing models
in path diagram format. The same procedures
were applied to the victimization items and
CFAs of perpetration and victimization were
tested separately.
Table 2 provides three measures of fit for
each model tested: the conventional likelihood ratio chi-square (LRχ2) test, the chisquare to degrees-of-freedom ratio (χ2/df),
and the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA). A model is considered to have
adequate fit when the chi-square to degreesof-freedom ratio is 5 or less, and when the
RMSEA is 0.08 or less (MacCallum,
Brown, & Sugawara, 1996). The LRχ2 test
provides an inferential test of the hypothesis
that the model fits the data perfectly. As indicated in Table 2, both models tested were
found to deviate significantly from perfect fit.
It is important to note that the LRχ2 test is not
recommended as a statistical test of model fit
because it is sensitive to sample size. It is,
however, the preferred measure for testing the
relative fit of two nested models (Hoyle &
Panter, 1995). In the current case, the twofactor model is nested in the one-factor
model. Although there was a strong association between same-gender and cross-gender
harassment for both perpetration (β = .90) and
victimization (β = .80), the two-factor model
fit the data significantly better than the onefactor model for both perpetration, ∆χ2 (1, N
= 1,213) = 13.38, p = .0001, and victimization, ∆χ2 (1, N = 1,213) = 28.07, p < .0001.
These results support the contention that
same- and cross-gender harassment are at
least partially distinct phenomena and should
be analyzed independently.
Grade-related increases in sameand cross-gender harassment
Based on our developmental contextual
framework, we expected that cross-gender harassment would increase in frequency across
the early adolescent years whereas same-gender harassment would not. Table 3 shows the
percentages of adolescents in each grade who

98

L. E. McMaster et al.

Figure 1. Confirmatory factor analyses of one-factor and two-factor models of
same-gender and cross-gender sexual harassment.
reported same-gender and cross-gender harassment. Grade-related increases in crossbut not same-gender harassment were investigated by WLS analysis of marginal frequencies. WLS analysis is conceptually similar to
traditional analysis of variance techniques,
but rather than analyzing marginal means and
partitioning variations among means into various sources, WLS analyzes marginal probabilities and partitions the variance among
these probabilities into various sources. Similar to the procedures used in hierarchical loglinear analysis, backward elimination of higher

order interactions is used to determine the
most parsimonious model.
In the present analysis, grade, gender, and
the repeated-measures factor specifying sameversus cross-gender harassment (type) were
entered into the model predicting probability
of harassment. Grade was treated as a continuous variable in order to test for linear trends.
Table 4 shows the WLS parameter estimates
and chi-square tests of significance for the
final model, after nonsignificant higher order
interactions were removed. As indicated, the
hypothesized Grade × Type interaction was

Adolescent sexual harassment

99

Table 2. Confirmatory factor analyses comparing singlefactor to two-factor model of sexual harassment (N = 1,213)
Models

Likelihood Ratio
χ2

χ2/df

RMSEA

35.75
22.37

3.97
2.80

.05
.04

73.29
45.22

8.14
5.65

.08
.06

Harassment perpetration
1-factora
2-factorb
Harassment victimization
1-factora
2-factorb
df = 9.
df = 8.
*p < .001.
a
b

Table 3. Percentages of boys and girls reporting same-gender and
cross-gender sexual harassment in each grade

Gender Grade
Boys

6
7
8
6
7
8

Girls

n

Same-Gender Same-Gender Cross-Gender Cross-Gender
Perpetration Victimization Perpetration Victimization
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)

143
226
267
153
185
239

22
31
37
8
9
12

29
33
43
16
14
15

10
14
30
10
15
26

15
16
35
23
30
44

Table 4. Weighted-least-squares estimates and chisquare tests of grade and gender in the perpetration
of same- and cross-gender sexual harassment
Effect

Weighted-LeastSquares Estimate

SE

χ2

Intercept
Typea
Genderb
Grade (linear)
Genderb × Typea
Grade (linear) × Typea

−0.22
0.19
0.05
0.06
0.05
−0.03

0.06
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

8.26
16.06*
32.74*
27.91*
77.83*
14.70*

a

“Type” is the repeated measures comparison of same-gender harassment to cross-gender harassment.
Boy, 0; girl, 1.
*p < .001.

b

significant. The lack of a significant Gender
× Grade × Type interaction indicates that the
hypothesized interaction is similar for boys
and girls. Decomposition of the Grade × Type
interaction indicated that, as predicted, there
was a positive linear grade trend for cross-

gender perpetration, χ2 (1, N = 1,213) = 40.30,
p < .001, but not for same-gender perpetration. Decomposition of the Gender × Type interaction indicated that boys perpetrate more
same-gender than cross-gender harassment, χ2
(1, N = 636) = 42.76, p < .001, while girls

100

L. E. McMaster et al.

Figure 2. Plot of predicted probabilities for perpetrating cross-gender and samegender sexual harassment by gender and grade.
perpetrate more cross-gender than same-gender harassment, χ2 (1, N = 577) = 29.70, p <
.001. Figure 2 displays a plot of the predicted
values for the probability of perpetrating harassment based on the WLS parameter estimates. The pattern of results for a parallel
WLS analysis for the probability of sexual harassment victimization was identical to that
for harassment perpetration.
Biological and social contexts of
sexual harassment
Finally, we examined the links between pubertal maturation, peer group gender composition, and sexual harassment of peers. Logistic
regression analyses were conducted because
of the dichotomous nature of the sexual ha-

rassment variables. These analyses were
conducted separately for same-gender and
cross-gender harassment because differential
patterns of associations were expected. Because harassment increased with grade and
was reported more often by boys than the
girls, age and gender were also included in
the analyses. To assess the biodevelopmental
links with each type of sexual harassment,
three regression models were tested: a first
model with age and gender, a second model
in which pubertal maturation was added to the
analysis, and a third model in which crossgender networks was also included. Exploratory analyses indicated that there were no
significant two-way interactions in any of the
models tested. The results of these analyses
are shown in Table 5.

Adolescent sexual harassment

101

Table 5. Logistic regression analyses of puberty and mixedgender networks for perpetration of sexual harassment
Parameter Estimates
Criterion
Cross-gender
perpetration

Same-gender
perpetration

Effect
Intercept
Gendera
Age
Z score for puberty
Mixed-gender network
Model χ2
Degrees of freedom
Intercept
Gendera
Age
Z score for puberty
Mixed-gender network
Model χ2
Degrees of freedom

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

−8.70*
0.03
0.57*
—
—
32.29*
2
−4.49*
−1.31*
0.29
—
—
77.39*
2

−6.40*
−0.01
0.38*
0.38*
—
49.98*
3
−3.02
−1.34*
0.18
0.24
—
85.57*
3

−6.54*
−0.04
0.38*
0.35*
1.57*
64.22*
4
−3.03
−1.38*
0.17
0.22
0.98
91.14*
4

Boy, 0; girl, 1; N = 1,013.
*p < .001.

a

As indicated, the regression analyses for
perpetration of same-gender and cross-gender
sexual harassment revealed different patterns
of association. Pubertal status and the gender
composition of the peer network were independently associated with increased likelihood of perpetrating cross-gender harassment,
after controlling for age and gender. Conversely, neither pubertal status nor gender
composition of the peer network was associated with same-gender harassment. Repeating
the analyses for victimization revealed an
identical pattern of results.
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to explore the
developmental context of sexual harassment
among young adolescents in the late elementary and middle school grades. The results indicated that a substantial number of these
youths, both boys and girls, are involved in
sexual harassment with same-gender and
cross-gender peers. Same- and cross-gender
sexual harassment are distinct phenomena at
this age, and it was only cross-gender harassment which increased with grade. Consistent
with our developmental contextual framework, perpetration of sexual harassment was

associated with adolescents’ pubertal maturity
and with their increased participation in
mixed-gender peer groups.
Both boys and girls reported perpetrating
sexual harassment, yet consistent with the
AAUW study (1993), boys were significantly
more likely to report this behavior than were
girls. This gender difference was not found
for the likelihood of experiencing sexual harassment, as both boys and girls in our study
reported comparable levels of victimization.
This result stands in contrast to the two previous studies of high school students (AAUW,
1993; PCSW, 1995), which found girls to be
significantly more likely to experience sexual
harassment than boys. We tested the possibility that the relatively high rate of male victimization in the present study was a function of
the frequent homophobic name-calling that
boys reported experiencing. Removal of the
homophobic name-calling item from the calculation of the summary harassment variables, however, had no effect on the pattern
of gender differences in sexual harassment
perpetration or victimization. It would appear
that boys and girls experience harassment victimization equally in early adolescence and
that the gender difference favoring girls’ victimization emerges only later on. Possibly,

102

older adolescent boys are less intimidated by
harassment and so become desensitized to its
occurrence whereas harassment continues to
be a distressing threat for girls. Alternatively,
though, harassment of girls may continue to
escalate into the high school years.
Same-gender and cross-gender harassment
were found to be distinct sets of behaviors.
This finding suggests that those youths who
sexually harass same-gender peers are not
necessarily the same youths who harass crossgender peers. Similarly, those youths who are
harassed by same-gender peers are not necessarily the same youths who are harassed by
cross-gender peers. A gender differentiation
was also found in that boys perpetrated and
experienced more same-gender than crossgender harassment, while the reverse was
found for girls. The greater cross-gender focus of girls’ harassment may reflect their earlier onset of pubertal maturation and consequent development of sexual interest in boys
(Marshall & Tanner, 1974). The boys’ more
frequent reporting of same-gender harassment
likely reflects a different source and would be
consistent with our view of same-gender harassment as a form of verbal aggression. In
late childhood and early adolescence, boys
and girls differ in their expression of aggression. Whereas boys tend to express aggression
in overt and direct forms, girls’ aggression
tends to be indirect and focused on relationships rather than individuals (Crick et al.,
1999). In early adolescence, it would appear
that a common way for boys to express verbal
hostility to each other is in the form of homophobic insults and comments. In North American cultures, the stigma against gay men is
very powerful. As Herek (1987) writes, “To
be a man in contemporary American society
is to be homophobic—that is, to be hostile
toward homosexual persons in general and
gay men in particular” (p. 68). The adolescent
boys in our study reflect this reality in their
use of homophobic harassment of each other.
Whether sexual harassment might be used as
a form of relational aggression by the girls is
an intriguing question. Spreading rumors of a
sexual nature and writing sexual messages
about someone are two harassment items that
would fall into the rubric of relational aggres-

L. E. McMaster et al.

sion, as defined by Crick and colleagues
(Crick et al., 1999). In our data girls do not
appear to differ from the boys in their rates
of relationally based sexual harassment, either
perpetration or victimization. It is possible
that girls do not use sexual content when they
are relationally aggressive, given the “double
standard” that exists in North American cultures even today. However, it may also be the
case that girls’ sexual harassment is used in
different situations not tapped into in the current study. Asking about the use of sexual
name-calling and sexual innuendo to exclude
another girl from the social group or to damage someone’s friendships are relational
forms of sexual harassment, and it would be
useful to explore their frequency among adolescent girls.
Overall, the results are consistent with a
developmental contextual model for the emergence of sexual harassment in early adolescence. As predicted, cross-gender harassment
but not same-gender harassment increased in
frequency across Grades 6–8. Examination of
the predictors of cross-gender harassment provided a clearer understanding of the developmental factors that contributed to this increase. First, pubertal status was strongly
linked to the likelihood of perpetrating harassment towards cross-gender peers. The hormonal changes associated with pubertal development lead directly to sexual arousal and
motivation (e.g., Finkelstein et al., 1998;
Halpern et al., 1994, 1997; Udry et al., 1986),
and this may be manifested in the higher likelihood of sexual harassment perpetration.
However, it is also possible that sexual harassment is only indirectly related to biological processes. For example, with puberty adolescents witness the development of their own
secondary sex characteristics, which, in Western culture, are signifiers of sexuality. As they
begin the process of integrating their sexuality
with their personal identity, they may explore
sexuality issues in a variety of ways including,
for socially unskilled or aggressive youths, imposing unwanted sexual attention on others.
In addition to pubertal maturation, social
network composition was also associated with
cross-gender harassment. Adolescents who
had a substantial number of cross-gender

Adolescent sexual harassment

friends were more likely to perpetrate crossgender sexual harassment than adolescents
with few cross-gender friends. This association likely reflects the fact that adolescents
who have more contact with cross-gender
peers in their friendship group therefore have
more opportunities to perpetrate sexual harassment. For most young adolescents, participation in mixed-gender groups is an eagerly
sought new venture. Yet, at the same time, for
some of these adolescents it is a form of social interaction for which they may not be
fully prepared. Hence, it may be those adolescents who are most stressed by the developmental challenge of cross-gender interactions
who resort to sexually harassing behaviors.
There is considerable evidence that boys in
particular are less well prepared than girls for
effectively managing interactions with crossgender peers (Buhrmester & Furman, 1987).
This relative lack of preparedness may contribute to the greater frequency of harassment
among boys than girls.
The developmental contextual model we
proposed was specific to cross-gender sexual
harassment. Interestingly, identical patterns of
association with pubertal maturation and social network composition were found for perpetration and for victimization. These results,
combined with the substantial overlap between harassment victimization and perpetration, suggest that it may be appropriate to
consider victimization and perpetration as two
aspects of a single phenomenon of harassment
involvement. This would lead one to think that
sexual harassment may be occurring between
peers within the peer network, rather than between unacquainted peers. Consistent with
this hypothesis, Fineran and Bennett (1997)
found that high school students were more
than twice as likely to report harassing known
peers than unknown peers. Studies of the development of romantic relationships in adolescence suggest that as youths begin the process of transformation into sexual adults, they
begin the exploration of romantic relationships within the friendship group context
rather than in a dyadic context (Connolly,
Furman, & Konarski, 2000; Dunphy, 1963;
Furman & Wehner, 1994). Therefore, it may
be in the group context that individuals learn

103

from peers appropriate ways to approach others sexually. Whether an individual’s harassment behaviors continue, escalate, or decline
may depend on peer group norms; that is, peer
groups will differ in the extent to which they
model and reinforce sexual harassment. The
process of peer influence on student to student
sexual harassment awaits further study.
This study has identified developmental
trends in harassing behavior during early adolescence as well as contextual variables which
influence its occurrence. As such, there are
implications for understanding developmental
risks for psychopathology. Sexual harassment
is quite pervasive in our culture and begins
to manifest itself during the transition from
childhood to adulthood. In view of the frequent occurrence of sexual harassment in elementary and middle school, the results of this
study would suggest that some of the harassment observed among young teens may be
similar to other types of adolescent deviance
that are time-limited misbehaviors and a response to the stress of coping with the
changes of adolescence. For other adolescents, however, sexual harassment of peers
occurs as part of a developmental trajectory
of interpersonal aggression that has its origins
earlier in development. It is not always simple
to distinguish between these two groups of
adolescents, especially at that developmental
point when harassment is just emerging.
When sexually harassing behaviors are a response to the developmental stressors of adolescence, however, they likely occur in isolation and not as part of a pattern of harassing
behaviors. On the other hand, adolescents who
sexually harass as part of a developmental pattern of interpersonal aggression are also likely
to show evidence of a constellation of interpersonally aggressive behaviors, such as bullying
or relational aggression. They may also show
harassment of peers in numerous other situations such as academic or athletic endeavors.
For these adolescents, the developmental stressors of adolescence amplify previous difficulties and the sexually harassing behaviors in
which they engage may establish precursors for
hostile patterns of interaction with cross-gender
friends and dating partners. An important direction for future research is to examine the gener-

104

ality of harassment across situational contexts
and particularly its links to other forms of interpersonally harmful behaviors.
The findings of the study also have implications for intervention. The high rates of sexual harassment in Grades 6–8, and the evidence that sexual harassment increases
significantly across these grades, suggest that
interventions for sexual harassment need to be
in place prior to high school, because interventions are more effective when they prevent
behavior patterns before they develop, rather
than after the patterns have stabilized. Given
the evidence that early maturing youths are
more likely to become involved in sexual harassment, parents and teachers should be particularly vigilant about the safety of early maturing youth. As well, helping adolescents
establish appropriate ways of interacting with
cross-gender peers and promoting norms for
nonharassing ways of relating to each other
are important goals for parents and teachers.
Finally, universal programs that deliver primary interventions to all youths would be
most valuable given the pervasive nature of
sexual harassment and the difficulty of detecting youth for whom such behavior is a precursor for future problems in cross-gender relationships.
As one of the first efforts to examine sexual harassment in the early years of adolescence, this study provides a powerful reminder of how early such behavior can arise
as well as the importance of examining its occurrence in the actual ecology of adolescents’
lives. In future research, it would be important
to further refine the measurement of sexual
harassment. In particular, it is unclear to what
extent early adolescents are able to accurately

L. E. McMaster et al.

report on unwanted harassment that they
themselves perpetrate. Because the measures
used in the study are self-report and because
sexual harassment is socially undesirable, it is
likely that this study underestimates the prevalence of sexual harassment. It is also possible
that the self-reporting response bias for sexual
harassment may operate differently for boys
and girls, as has been shown in the case of
dating violence (Browne, 1993; O’Leary, Malone, & Tyree, 1994). Using reports from
peers or other observers of behavior would be
important in validating the extent of sexual
harassment in schools for both boys and girls.
Finally, while our study highlights the biosocial context of harassing behavior, it does not
address the more immediate situational context in which harassment occurs. Examining
the social interactions between peers in which
harassing behaviors occur would help to distinguish between behaviors that are aggressively motivated and those that are immature
expressions of sexual interest.
In summary, this study suggests that sexual
harassment among peers is frequent as children enter adolescence and is associated with
the processes of developing sexuality and
mixed-gender socialization. Although understandable within a developmental framework,
sexual harassment is by no means a necessary
or healthy aspect of adolescence. Sexual harassment is a humiliating and distressing experience for victims and can be part of a syndrome of cross-gender intimidation for
perpetrators. Only by acknowledging and addressing the pervasiveness of sexual harassment and its emotional impact can we truly
claim we are protecting the safety of all students in our schools.

References
American Association of University Women. (1993).
Hostile hallways: The AAUW survey on sexual harassment in America’s schools. Washington, DC:
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation.
American Association of University Women. (1992).
Shortchanging girls, shortchanging America. Author.
Blyth, D. A., Hill, J. P., & Thiel, K. S. (1982). Early
adolescents’ significant others: Grade and gender differences in perceived relationships with familial and
nonfamilial adults and young people. Journal of
Youth and Adolescence, 11, 425–449.

Browne, A. (1993). Violence against women by male
partners. American Psychologist, 48, 1077–1087.
Buhrmester, D., & Furman, W. (1987). The development
of companionship and intimacy. Child Development,
58, 1101–1113.
Bush, D. M., & Simmons, R. G. (1987). Gender and coping with the entry into early adolescence. In R. C.
Barnett, L. Biener, & G. K. Baruch (Eds.), Gender
and stress (pp. 185–217). New York: Free Press.
Cairns, R. B., & Cairns, B. D. (1994). Lifelines and risks:
Pathways of youth in our time. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Adolescent sexual harassment
Caspi, A., Lynam, D., Moffitt, T. E., & Silva, P. A. (1993).
Unraveling girls’ delinquency: Biological, dispositional,
and contextual contributions to adolescent misbehavior.
Developmental Psychology, 29, 19–30.
Cicchetti, D., & Aber, L. (1998). Contextualism and developmental psychopathology. Development and Psychopathology, 10, 137–141.
Connolly, J., Furman, W., & Konarski, R. (2000). The
role of peers in the emergence of heterosexual romantic relationships in adolescence. Child Development,
71, 1395–1408.
Connolly, J. A., & Konarski, R. (1994). Peer self-concept
in adolescence: Analysis of factor structure and of associations with peer experience. Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 4, 385–403.
Crick, N. R., Werner, N. E., Casas, J. F., O’Brien, K. M.,
Nelson, D. A., Grotpeter, J. K., & Markon, K. (1999).
Childhood aggression and gender: A new look at an
old problem. In D. Bernstein (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation: Vol. 45. Gender and motivation
(pp. 75–141). University of Nebraska Press.
Dunphy, D. (1963). The social structure of urban adolescent peer groups. Sociometry, 26, 230–246.
Feiring, C., & Lewis, M. (1991). The transition from middle childhood to early adolescence: Sex differences in
the social network and perceived self-competence.
Sex Roles, 7/8, 489–509.
Fineran, S., & Bennett, L. (1997). Gender and power issues of peer sexual harassment among teenagers.
Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 14, 626–641.
Finkelstein, J. W., Susman, E. J., Chinchilli, V. M.,
D’Arcangelo, M. R., Kunselman, S. J., Schwab, J.,
Demers, L. M., Liben, L. S., & Kulin, H. E. (1998).
Effects of estrogen or testosterone on self-reported
sexual responses and behaviors in hypogonadal adolescents. Journal of Clinical Endrocrinology and Metabolism, 83, 2281–2285.
Furman, W., & Wehner, E. A. (1994). Romantic views:
Toward a theory of adolescent romantic relationships.
In R. Montemayor, G. R. Adams, & T. P. Gullotta
(Eds.), Advances in adolescent development: Personal relationships during adolescence (Vol. 6, pp.
168–195). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Halpern, C. T., Udry, J. R., Campbell, B., Suchindran,
C., & Mason, G. A. (1994). Testosterone and religiosity as predictors of sexual attitudes and activity
among adolescent males: A biosocial model. Journal
of Biosocial Science, 26, 217–234.
Halpern, C. T., Udry, J. R., & Suchindran, C. (1997).
Testosterone predicts initiation of coitus in adolescent
females. Psychosomatic Medicine, 59, 161–171.
Herek, G. M. (1987). On heterosexual masculinity: Some
physical consequences of the social construction of
gender and sexuality. In M. Kimmel (Ed.), Changing
men: New directions in men and masculinity (pp. 68–
82). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hoyle, R. H., & Panter, A. T. (1995). Writing about
structural equation models. In R. H. Hoyle (Ed.),
Structural equation models: Concepts, issues, and applications (pp. 158–176). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Jöreskog, K. G., & Sörbom, D. (1988). PRELIS: A preprocessor for LISREL. Mooresville, IN: Scientific Software.
Jöreskog, K. G., & Sörbom, D. (1989). LISREL 7: A guide
to the program and applications. Chicago: SPSS Inc.
Larkin, J. (1994). Walking through walls: The sexual harassment of high school girls. Gender and Education,
6, 263–280.

105
Lee, V. E., Croninger, R. G., Linn, E., & Chen, X.
(1996). The culture of sexual harassment in secondary
schools. American Educational Research Journal, 33,
383–417.
Lerner, R. M., & Simi, N. L. (2000). A holistic integrated
model of risk and protection in adolescence: A developmental contextual perspective about research, programs and policies. In L. R. Bergman, R. B. Cairns,
L. G. Nilsson, & L. Nystedt (Eds.), Developmental
science and the holistic approach (pp. 421–444).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacCallum, R. C., Brown, M. W., & Sugawara, H. M.
(1996). Power analysis and determination of sample
size for covariance structure modeling. Psychological
Methods, 1, 130–149.
Maharaj, S., & Connolly, J. (1994). Peer networks of acculturated and ethnolinguistically affiliated adolescents in a multicultural setting. Journal of Adolescent
Research, 9, 218–239.
Marshall, W. A., & Tanner, J. M. (1974). Puberty. In
J. D. Douvis & J. Drobeing (Eds.), Scientific foundation of pediatrics (pp. 124–151). London: Heinemann.
Murphy, C. M., & O’Leary, K. D. (1989). Psychological
aggression predicts physical aggression in early marriage. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
57, 579–582.
O’Donohue, W., Downs, K., & Yeater, E.-A. (1999).
Sexual harassment: A review of the literature. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 3, 111–128.
O’Leary, K. D., Malone, J., & Tyree, A. (1994). Physical
aggression in early marriage: Prerelationship and relationship effects. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 62, 594–602.
Ontario Secondary Schools Teacher’s Federation
(OSSTF), Ontario Women’s Directorate, & Ministry of Education and Training. (1995). The joke’s
over: Student to student sexual harassment. Toronto:
OSSTF.
Permanent Commission (CT) on the Status of Women.
(1995). In our own backyard: Sexual harassment in
Connecticut’s public high schools. Hartford, CT: Author.
Petersen, A., Crockett, L., Richards, M., & Boxer, A.
(1988). A self-report measure of pubertal status: Reliability, validity and initial norms. Journal of Youth
and Adolescence, 17, 117–133.
Roscoe, B., Strouse, J. S., & Goodwin, M. P. (1994). Sexual harassment: Early adolescents’ self-reports of experiences and acceptance. Adolescence, 29, 515–523.
Smith, E. A., Udry, J. R., & Morris, N. M. (1985). Pubertal development and friends: A biosocial explanation
of adolescent sexual behavior. Journal of Health and
Social Behavior, 26, 183–192.
Udry, J. R. (1990). Hormonal and social determinants of
adolescent sexual initiation. In J. Bancroft & J. M.
Reinisch (Eds.), Adolescence and puberty (pp. 70–
87). New York: Oxford University Press.
Udry, J. R., Talbert, L. M., & Morris, N. M. (1986). Biosocial foundations for adolescent female sexuality.
Demography, 23, 217–227.
Wise, S., & Stanley, L. (1987). Georgie Porgie: Sexual
harassment in everyday life. London: Pandora.
Wolfe, D. A., Wekerle, C., Reitzel–Jaffe, D., & Lefebvre,
L. (1998). Factors associated with abusive relationships among maltreated and nonmaltreated youth. Development and Psychopathology, 10, 61–85.

