Psychology of Women Quarterly, 32 (2008), 113–125. Blackwell Publishing, Inc. Printed in the USA.
C 2008 Division 35, American Psychological Association. 0361-6843/08
Copyright 

CRITICAL CLIMATE: RELATIONS AMONG SEXUAL
HARASSMENT, CLIMATE, AND OUTCOMES
FOR HIGH SCHOOL GIRLS AND BOYS
Alayne J. Ormerod
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Linda L. Collinsworth
Millikin University

Leigh Ann Perry
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

This study examined the relationships among peer-to-peer sexual harassment, school climate, adult-to-student harassment, and outcomes (psychological and physical well-being; school withdrawal and safety) for high school girls (n = 310)
and boys (n = 259) recruited from seven public high schools in a Midwestern state. More frequent, severe peer harassment was associated with being female; holding climate perceptions that one’s school is tolerant of the harassment of
girls; and experiencing more frequent, severe harassment by school personnel. The correlates associated with outcomes
varied by outcome, with climate exerting a consistent influence on boys’ outcomes. Girls’ outcomes were associated
with climate, harassment, or both. Findings suggest that more frequent, severe experiences of sexual harassment in the
schools are associated with direct, negative effects on girls and indirect, negative effects on boys and girls through a
school climate that tolerates the harassment of girls.

The reality of sexual harassment in the schools was brought
to national attention by two groundbreaking studies conducted by the American Association of University Women
(AAUW, 1993, 2001) in which an alarmingly high number
of female and male students reported harassment while
in school with detriment to their psychological and educational well-being. A majority of studies that followed used
the AAUW survey, either replicating the original study (e.g.,
Stratton & Backes, 1997), adapting the questionnaire to
make it stronger methodologically (e.g., Duffy, Wareham,
& Walsh, 2004), or reanalyzing the data using more sophisticated techniques (e.g., Hand & Sanchez, 2000; Lee,

Alayne J. Ormerod and Leigh Ann Perry, Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Linda L.
Collinsworth, Department of Psychology, Millikin University.
This research was supported in part by National Institute of
Mental Health grant # MH50791-08. The opinions in this article
are those of the authors. Portions of this article were presented at
the annual conference of the American Psychological Association,
Washington, DC, August 2005.
Thanks to our anonymous reviewers and to members of the
Work Experiences Lab at the University of Illinois.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Alayne J.
Ormerod, Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 603 East Daniel St., Champaign, IL, 61820.
E-mail: aormerod@cyrus.psych.uiuc.edu

Croninger, Linn, & Chen, 1996). These efforts have contributed to our understanding of harassment in schools, particularly the educational and psychological consequences
of sexual harassment and the importance of appraisal when
considering the link between harassment and outcome.
However, findings that uniformly high numbers of
students report sexual harassment raise questions about
whether boys and girls have similar experiences of harassment, the meaningfulness of describing rates, and whether
current measurement of harassment has adequately described gender experiences with harassment. The purpose
of the present study is to better understand high school
students’ experiences with sexual harassment using a survey instrument that provides methodological advances over
previous measures. Specifically, we investigated the contributions of school climate, peer-to-peer sexual harassment,
and adult-to-student sexual harassment to psychological,
health, and school outcomes for girls and boys and the role
of gender in predicting peer harassment.
Extent and Appraisal of High School Harassment: Why
Do We Need New Methods for Measuring
Sexual Harassment?
Despite contributions of large-scale studies such as the
AAUW surveys, research on high school harassment has
been plagued with many of the same problems that faced
113

114
early research of sexual harassment in work organizations.
For example, research in this area has relied on measures that lack a theoretical framework for conceptualizing harassing behaviors, with results typically reported
item by item or by grouping items rationally into types
of behaviors, such as physical and nonphysical (e.g.,
AAUW, 1993, 2001; Duffy et al., 2004). Although logical, such methods of categorization may not accurately
reflect psychological or institutional definitions of sexual
harassment and do not describe an underlying structure
of harassment (e.g., gender harassment, unwanted sexual attention, and sexual coercion; Fitzgerald, Gelfand, &
Drasgow, 1995; Gelfand, Fitzgerald, & Drasgow, 1995).
Using a list of behaviors, rather than a reliable instrument, also runs the risk of assessing the construct incompletely, thereby underestimating actual incidence and underrepresenting the array of experiences an individual can
encounter.
Further, various researchers have used differing definitions of harassment or relied on participants supplying their
own definitions rather than asking about behaviors (e.g.,
“said offensive things about your body”) that are consistent
with theoretically driven definitions of harassment. For example, in one study, participants were asked “if they had
been the target of sexually inappropriate behavior in high
school” (Corbett, Gentry, & Pearson, 1993, p. 97). Such
methods of assessing sexual harassment require individuals
to label their experiences as inappropriate, which is problematic because far fewer women label their experiences as
sexual harassment than experience unwanted sex-related
behavior at school or work (e.g., Fitzgerald et al., 1988;
Magley, Hulin, Fitzgerald, & DeNardo, 1999; Schneider,
Swan, & Fitzgerald, 1997).
In those studies modeled after the AAUW survey, students were given a definition of sexual harassment before
assessing whether they experienced any of 14 harassing behaviors. Providing a definition of harassment at the outset
cues students to label their experiences as harassment before being asked about behavioral experiences, which can
introduce error into the data. Research demonstrates that
not only do substantial differences exist in perceptions of
what constitutes sexual harassment, but also many respondents are reluctant to use the label (Koss, 1990). Findings
support that labeling has limited value in predicting outcomes beyond that of incidence rates (Magley et al., 1999;
Munson, Miner, & Hulin, 2001).
Current research also varies as to the length of time during which the harassment is assessed, from 2 weeks (Duffy
et al., 2004) to the entire length of high school attendance
(Houston & Hwang, 1996), with some researchers measuring harassment retrospectively by asking college students
about their high school experiences (e.g., Corbett et al.,
1993). Although not all methods of assessing harassment
have inherent problems, the use of various methods can
make comparisons difficult across studies because the rates
of harassment are not directly comparable. Thus, we argue

ORMEROD ET AL.
that it is important to assess sexual harassment with a behavioral measure that conforms to current theory and definition.
Whereas reporting rates of harassment provides information about the frequency of occurrence and helps to
establish the extent of such behavior, reporting the target’s
appraisal communicates whether the target found the harassing behaviors distressing and can provide information
about whether the behavior was meaningful. Assessing subjective appraisal along with frequency is important because
it can distinguish extant behavior that is inconsequential to
the target from that which is considered harmful. With rates
so high, some have suggested that sexual interactions among
teens in schools are an accepted (if not welcomed) component of adolescents’ lives. Contrary to such suggestions,
research indicates that both boys and girls are distressed by
harassing behaviors, but that girls are far more likely to find
harassment upsetting than boys (AAUW, 2001; Duffy et al.,
2004; Fineran & Bennett, 1999).
Interestingly, in some of the studies reviewed, students
were not asked to appraise their own experiences but rather
whether they would find such experiences upsetting if they
were to happen to them (e.g., Hand & Sanchez, 2000; Lee
et al., 1996); thus, appraisal did not directly assess personal harassment experiences. This method of measuring
appraisal raises the question of how closely the appraisal
of hypothesized behavior corresponds to appraisal of actual
experiences. A potentially more reliable method of assessing the degree to which harassment is distressing to a target
is to measure appraisals of experienced behavior.
Considering Gender
Although rates of sexual harassment are exceptionally high
for both girls and boys, rates for girls exceed those of boys
(88% of girls and 83% of boys report peer harassment,
and 41% of girls and 36% of boys report harassment by
school personnel; AAUW, 2001). Girls also perceive harassing experiences as more harmful and upsetting than do boys
(Hand & Sanchez, 2000; Lee et al., 1996) and receive “qualitatively more severe, physically intrusive, and intimidating
forms of harassment” (Hand & Sanchez, 2000, p. 740). Further, girls have worse outcomes (Hand & Sanchez, 2000),
and although not a focus of this study, boys harass more than
girls (Hand & Sanchez, 2000). Thus, harassment cannot
be conceptualized as gender neutral; rather, gender must
be a critical aspect of understanding and addressing this
problem.
Gender is particularly important to consider when looking at high school harassment given the context of the developmental stage of high school students and gender-role
socialization. It is important to note that victimization experiences of adolescents in high school may be different from
those of adults in the workplace. One factor that is blatantly
different between the two groups is that of developmental
stage. Both biological and social changes in development

High School Sexual Harassment
may affect experiences of peer sexual harassment. Among
these changes are puberty, maturation, and changes in the
peer group. The rate at which adolescents physically mature, either earlier or later than their peers, may also leave
them vulnerable to victimization. A study by Craig, Pepler,
Connolly, and Henderson (2001) found a relationship between puberty and sexual harassment: Adolescents who had
matured early were found to be at increased risk for sexual
harassment.
Gender-role socialization is also being reinforced by
peers within the school setting. Although an overt power
differential does not exist between male and female peers
as it does between teachers, administrations, and students,
power differentials between males and females in the outside world carry into the classroom (Grube & Lens, 2003),
creating a hierarchy of power in which male students are in
a dominant position over female students.
We argue that it is necessary to assess whether there
are gender differences in experiences of sexual harassment
given the context within which harassment is taking place
and that girls report more harassment and related distress.
In the current study, we hypothesize that girls will report
more peer harassment and appraise it as more upsetting
than boys.
School Climate
School climate is defined variously in the literature on high
school harassment. One perspective describes it as teachers’ recognition of, and attention to, inappropriate behaviors in school. Under this rubric, some have suggested that
students perceive teachers as generally unresponsive to student complaints about sexual harassment and that teachers
typically ignore harassment that occurs in front of them
in public areas such as hallways and the cafeteria (AAUW,
1993; Dupper & Meyer-Adams, 2002; Hand & Sanchez,
2000; Lee et al., 1996).1 Lee and colleagues (1996) examined various theoretical positions for their ability to explain
sexual harassment in the schools, conceptualizing school
personnel harassment of students as an “abuse of organizational power.” They found that such harassment was related
to increases in the overall occurrence and severity of sexual
harassment in the school, particularly for girls. Presumably,
when such power abuse occurs it sends a message that harassing behavior is tolerated. Given that targets of sexual
harassment by school personnel are most often girls, this
message contains a gendered element about who is an acceptable target.
The research on school climate has elements in common with studies of organizational climate in the workplace, which demonstrate that a climate supportive of sexual
harassment is directly associated with increases in harassment and negative psychological, work, and health outcomes (e.g., Fitzgerald, Hulin, & Drasgow, 1995; Pryor,
Giedd, & Williams, 1995; Pryor & Whalen, 1997; Williams,
Fitzgerald, & Drasgow, 1999). Some researchers define organizational climate as shared perceptions about contingen-

115
cies between sexually harassing behaviors and subsequent
outcomes and operationalize climate as the risk of complaining about harassment, the likelihood that a complaint
would be taken seriously by one’s superiors, and the probability that the perpetrator would be sanctioned (Hulin,
Fitzgerald, & Drasgow, 1996). As such, this method assesses perceptions about how those in authority respond
to sexually harassing behavior (Sims, 2005).
Hulin and colleagues’ (1996) conceptualization of organizational climate has been adapted to a high school context
(Chesire, 2004). Perceptions that one’s school is tolerant
of sexual harassment were related to more frequent experiences of sexual harassment for girls and lowered social
support for boys and girls (Chesire, 2004). In this research,
Chesire tested a model of workplace harassment adapted
to the school context and concluded that using a workplace
framework can be valuable for understanding the nature of
harassment in the schools. Given that there has been less
systematic research on high school harassment than harassment in the workplace, applying frameworks and methods
from one context to the other can help to advance those
areas with less research and establish the generalizability of
harassment-related experiences across contexts.2
Consistent with an organizational approach and Lee
et al.’s (1996) “abuse of power” conceptualization, we examined the contributions of school climate and adult-tostudent harassment to peer harassment. We hypothesize
that, as school climate becomes more accepting of sexual harassment and as students report more harassment by school
personnel, peer harassment will increase.
Outcomes
Research links experiences of sexual harassment in adults
to an array of negative psychological, health, and educational outcomes, including lowered self-esteem (Gutek &
Koss, 1993; Harned & Fitzgerald, 2002) and psychological distress (Harned & Fitzgerald, 2002; Huerta, Cortina,
Pang, Torges, & Magley, 2006). Additionally, there is evidence that the consequences of harassment may persist over
time (Duffy et al., 2004; vanRoosmalen & McDaniel, 1998).
Psychological consequences thought to be associated with
peer harassment include negative self-evaluations, such as
self-consciousness, embarrassment, fear, feeling less confident, doubts about one’s ability to succeed in graduate
school or have a happy relationship, confusion about oneself, and feeling less popular, along with symptoms similar
to posttraumatic stress disorder (AAUW, 1993, 2001; Duffy
et al., 2004; Grube & Lens, 2003; Hand & Sanchez, 2000;
Lee et al., 1996; Sabella, 2001; Strauss, 2003). Although the
relationship between self-esteem and harassment has not
been examined with adolescents, given that harassment is
related to adolescents’ self-evaluations, self-esteem may be
affected as well.
Negative health outcomes of adolescent sexual harassment comprise a range of physical symptoms (e.g.,

116
headaches, problems sleeping, nervousness) including
those related to eating, such as nausea, loss of appetite,
and loss of interest in eating (Duffy et al., 2004; Grube &
Lens, 2003; Hand & Sanchez, 2000; Lee et al., 1996; Timmerman, 2004). Research with female college students and
working women finds direct and indirect (e.g., mediated
through psychological distress) relationships between experiences of sexual harassment and negative body image
and disturbed eating (Harned, 2000; Harned & Fitzgerald,
2002; Huerta et al., 2006). The impact of sexual harassment
on body image has not been established in high school students, but is important to consider given that harassment
can be directed at one’s appearance and is associated with
psychological distress and changes in eating behavior in high
school students.
Negative educational outcomes for adolescents include
those associated with school withdrawal such as talking less
in class, receiving lower grades, not wanting to go to school,
skipping classes, thoughts of changing schools, getting in
trouble with school authorities, paying less attention in class,
and finding it more difficult to study. Related behavioral
consequences have been described as attempts to manage
the harassment or avoid the harasser(s) by altering routes to
and from school, changing one’s seat in class to get farther
away from someone, avoiding the harasser, getting someone
else to serve as one’s protector, changing one’s friends, quitting particular activities or sports, other attempts at avoiding
school locales or individuals, and other acts that either harm
or limit one’s self (AAUW, 1993, 2001; Duffy et al., 2004;
Hand & Sanchez, 2000; Lee et al., 1996; Strauss, 2003).
Such behaviors appear to reflect issues of safety for those
students who have been harassed, as they could serve as
methods to assist harassed students in feeling safer while at
school.
The AAUW studies (1993, 2001) found that girls are
more likely to experience negative psychological and educational consequences from harassment than boys, which
raises the question of whether sexual harassment is qualitatively different for boys and girls. Hand and Sanchez
(2000) suggest that there is a difference and that it may
be due to students’ perceptions of harmfulness as well as
the frequency and severity of the harassment experienced.
Duffy et al. (2004) report that the link between sexual harassment and negative psychological and educational consequences is indeed mediated by how upset the student
was by the behavior(s). Such findings are consistent with
research on workplace harassment in which the subjective
appraisal of harassing experiences has been found to mediate the relationship between harassment frequency and
outcomes (Langhout et al., 2005; Reed, 2004). Lazarus and
Folkman’s (1984) cognitive stress framework offers an explanation for this relationship, suggesting that it is the appraisal of the event as stressful or upsetting, in combination
with the event itself, that is thought to determine outcome
rather than the event alone (Fitzgerald, Swan, & Fischer,
1995; Fitzgerald, Swan, & Magley, 1997).

ORMEROD ET AL.
Hand and Sanchez’s (2000) analyses of the AAUW (1993)
data used hypothetical appraisal ratings (termed perceived
harmfulness) of how upset the student would be if they experienced sexually harassing behaviors. Their findings suggest that girls perceive greater harm from harassment than
boys and that girls report higher frequencies of physical, invasive forms of sexual harassment. Hand and Sanchez created weighted scores by multiplying the perceived harmfulness ratings by frequency scores to assess what they term
severity of harassing experiences and found that girls experience greater severity. Similarly, Lee et al. (1996), also using
AAUW data, created a severity score from three factors (hypothetical appraisal ratings, frequency of harassment, and
the number of types of harassment) and found that girls experience greater severity of harassment. Severity predicted
outcomes such that the more severely a student was harassed, the greater the chance for experiencing negative
psychological, educational, and behavioral outcomes.
However, some research on the consequences of high
school harassment has been criticized because only those
students who have been harassed are directed to answer
questions about outcomes (Duffy et al., 2004). Additionally, on some surveys’ questions about outcomes have been
placed after those about harassment, and students are asked
whether the harassment “caused” them to experience the
particular outcome (e.g., AAUW, 2001). Such practices are
problematic because they curtail meaningful comparisons
of outcomes for harassed and nonharassed students and
allow for response bias. A more neutral method of measuring outcomes is to ask all students about psychological and
health status and school outcomes prior to any mention of
sexual harassment.
In this study, we hypothesize that outcomes (self-esteem,
negative body image, psychological distress, health satisfaction, sense of safety at school, and withdrawal from school)
will be a function of harassment by school personnel, student perceptions of school climate, and peer harassment.
We tested these relationships separately by gender to examine whether this set of variables was meaningful for both
girls and boys.
METHOD
Participants
High school seniors, 310 girls and 268 boys (N = 578),
were surveyed from seven public high schools in a Midwestern state. Participants ranged in age from 16 to 20
years (M = 17.36, SD = 0.54). Participants identified their
race or ethnicity as African American/Black (20.3%, n =
117), Asian (0.5%, n = 3), Spanish/Hispanic/Latino (3.6%,
n = 21), Native American (1.0%, n = 6), Other/Multiracial
(4.0%, n = 23), and White (75.3%, n = 434). Percentages
sum to more than 100 because participants were able to
check more than one racial or ethnic category. Self-reported
grades were in the “B” range (M = 5.73, SD = 1.62), and
more than half of the participants (56.3%, n = 324) were

High School Sexual Harassment

117
Table 1

Descriptive and Psychometric Information for the Major Variables
Girls (n = 310)
Scale (number of items)
Climate (15)
Adult SHab (19)
Peer SHab (23)
Self-esteem (10)
Negative body image (10)
Psychological distress (14)
Health satisfaction (7)
Sense of safety at school (4)
Withdrawal from school (4)c

Boys (n = 259)

Range

M

SD

α

Range

M

SD

α

15-75
19-180
23-232
12-40
10-60
0-53
7-21
4-20
4-19

35.07
30.54
70.06
31.07
29.82
10.32
16.69
15.37
9.18

10.86
25.91
44.45
5.94
15.20
9.66
3.19
4.16
3.66

.88
.93
.92
.89
.97
.89
.74
.78
.59

15-73
19-77
23-148
15-40
10-60
0-56
8-21
4-20
4-20

32.30
22.82
44.56
32.42
17.92
9.04
18.16
16.31
10.26

10.86
8.90
22.18
5.43
10.68
9.59
2.90
3.84
3.56

.88
.80
.86
.87
.95
.89
.74
.77
.56

SH = sexual harassment.
Adult school personnel or staff-to-student SH and peer-to-peer SH were weighted by appraisal.
c
The low alpha coefficients for this scale were likely due to a small number of items attempting to tap a wide range of
withdrawal behaviors.
a

b

in college preparatory classes, with 71.3% reporting that
they planned to attend college following high school. The
seven high schools included five from small to midsize rural towns with little racial and ethnic diversity (i.e., of the
289 students in these five schools, 95% were White) and
two midsize towns in which 69% and 34% of students were
White, respectively.
Procedure
Public schools were recruited from a Midwestern state
based on their likelihood to cooperate, thus constituting a
convenience sample of schools. In five of the schools, a near
census of the senior class was taken by having all seniors in
school on the day of the survey take it in a central location
(e.g., cafeteria) or by having the researchers survey students
in a required senior class (e.g., senior English) throughout
the day. In two schools, the administrator selected senior
classes and allowed the research team to collect data during
those classes throughout the day.
Permission was gained from students and parents or
guardians. Approximately 2 weeks prior to data collection,
all parents of seniors received a permission letter via U.S.
mail or carried home by their child that provided a description of the purpose of the study, contact information for
the principal investigator and the university Institutional
Review Board, and information about how to refuse their
child’s participation. At the beginning of each administration, students were provided with an informed consent letter that provided information about the purpose of the
study, their rights as a human subject, and contact information for the researchers and the university Institutional
Review Board. Participating students signed and returned
the informed consent prior to the survey being distributed.
Two criteria were used to exclude surveys from analyses.
Surveys were examined during data entry and any survey
that appeared to be completed in a random or nonserious

manner was flagged. These surveys were examined independently by two members of the research team, one of
whom was the principal investigator. When both team members agreed that the responses were nonserious, the survey
was excluded. Second, surveys that had a large amount of
missing data (approximately 50% or more of eligible responses) were excluded. In all, nine surveys were excluded,
all from boys, which resulted in a final sample of 310 girls
(54.5%) and 259 boys.
Instrumentation
Information was gathered via a paper-and-pencil survey designed to reduce response bias. Methodological limitations
present in earlier survey research on high school harassment
were addressed by placing questions about outcomes at the
beginning of the survey, independent from questions about
harassment experiences; using theoretically grounded, behavioral, multi-item measures of peer and adult harassment
experiences; asking participants to appraise actual harassment experiences; and assessing two aspects of school climate: perceptions of tolerance for sexual harassment and
experiences with harassment by adult personnel. Descriptive statistics for all scales are presented in Table 1 and the
intercorrelations among the major variables can be seen in
Table 2.
Demographic variables. Demographic variables were
recoded to facilitate analyses. We were unable to conduct
analyses separately by racial or ethnic group because, other
than White, there were too few students in each group.
We formed two dichotomous, nonoverlapping racial/ethnic
groups, coded as Minority = 1 (n = 149, 26.3%) and
White = 2 (n = 418, 73.7%). Self-reported grades were
coded as 1 = mostly F’s (0.4% of the sample), 2 = mostly
D’s (1.2%), 3 = more C’s than D’s (8.6%), 4 = mostly C’s
(13.8%), 5 = more B’s than C’s (20.6%), 6 = mostly B’s

118

ORMEROD ET AL.
Table 2
Intercorrelations Among the Major Variables
Scale

1

2

3

1 Climate
–
.23∗∗
.17∗
ab
∗
2 Adult SH
.16
–
.57∗∗
ab
∗∗
∗∗
.21
.60
–
3 Peer SH
4 Self-esteem
−.21∗∗ −.21∗∗ −.27∗∗
5 Negative body image
.03
.23∗∗
.24∗∗
6 Psychological distress
.17∗∗
.14∗
.37∗∗
∗∗
∗
7 Health satisfaction
−.18
−.13
−.25∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
8 Sense of safety at school −.32
−.24
−.37∗∗
9 Withdrawal from school
.22∗∗
.14∗
.17∗∗

4
−.27∗∗
−.08
−.14
–
−.49∗∗
−.53∗∗
.47∗∗
.35∗∗
−.28∗∗

5

6

.08
.35∗∗
−.01
.25∗∗
∗
.18
.26∗∗
∗∗
−.48
−.54∗∗
–
.41∗∗
.33∗∗
–
−.27∗∗ −.48∗∗
−.14∗ −.34∗∗
.12
.25∗∗

7
−.32∗∗
−.09
−.15∗
.43∗∗
−.31∗∗
−.50∗∗
–
.35∗∗
−.28∗∗

8

9

−.26∗∗
.31∗∗
∗∗
−.19
.10
−.21∗∗
.11
.25∗∗ −.29∗∗
−.09
.14
−.35∗∗
.29∗∗
∗∗
.34
−.29∗∗
–
−.23∗∗
−.25∗∗
–

Note: Correlations for girls (n = 252) appear below the diagonal; correlations for boys (n = 202) are above the diagonal.
a
SH = sexual harassment.
b
Adult school personnel or staff-to-student SH and peer-to-peer SH were weighted by appraisal.
∗
p < .05. ∗∗ p < .01.

(18.5%), 7 = more A’s than B’s (19.9%), and 8 = mostly
A’s (16.7%). Length of time at high school was coded for
years attending one’s high school from 1 to 6, with 87% of
students having attended for 4 or more years. School attended was dummy coded from 1 to 7, with school 7, the
largest school, as the comparison school in the regression
equations.
Sexual harassment from peers and appraisal. Experiences of peer-to-peer harassment were assessed using a 23item version of the Sexual Experiences Questionnaire–High
School scale (SEQ-HS; Collinsworth, 2000). Items reflect
a range of unwanted, sexually inappropriate behavior from
high school peers along three dimensions of sexual harassment (i.e., gender harassment, 7 items; unwanted sexual
attention, 7 items; and sexual coercion, 3 items); six additional questions ask about experiences with sexual assault.
Respondents indicated how often each behavior happened
to them while at their current high school (coded such that
1 = never, 2 = once, 3 = twice or more). For items endorsed once or more, respondents were asked to appraise
their level of distress along a 4-point scale coded 1 (not upset) to 4 (very upset). The appraisal ratings were used to
weight each item by multiplying the appraisal score by the
frequency score. Weighted items were summed to create a
scale score for the 23 items, with higher scores reflecting
more frequent and distressing peer-to-peer harassment.3
The current measure had alpha coefficients of .92 for girls
and .86 for boys.
The SEQ-HS was based on the Sexual Experiences
Questionnaire (SEQ; Fitzgerald, Gelfand et al., 1995;
Fitzgerald et al., 1988), a measure of workplace and college
harassment that has received strong support for its theoretical and psychometric properties (Arvey & Cavanaugh,
1995). Wording and content were modified for a high
school context, and additional items were created to reflect behaviors specific to high school experiences (e.g.,
“hinted or said something bad would happen if you didn’t go

along with something sexual, for example, that you would
lose friendships or rumors would be spread about you”).
Collinsworth reported that the SEQ-HS conforms to the
three theoretically derived dimensions of sexual harassment
(Gelfand et al., 1995) and reports alpha coefficients of .89
for girls and .88 for boys.
Sexual harassment from school personnel and appraisal.
Harassment of students by teachers, administrators, and
other adults at the high school was tapped by a 19-item measure (Collinsworth, 2000) adapted from the SEQ (Fitzgerald et al., 1988). Similar in format to the SEQ-HS, this
measure presented respondents with items that described
different types of sexual harassment or assault behaviors
by teachers and other school personnel (e.g., told sexual
stories or jokes that you didn’t want to hear, made forceful
attempts to have sex with you). Collinsworth reported alpha
coefficients of .89 for girls and .95 for boys.
The response scales for frequency and appraisal were
identical to those described for the SEQ-HS, and harassment by adults was weighted in the same manner. Weighted
items were summed, with higher scores reflecting more frequent and distressing harassment by school personnel to
students (α = .93 for girls and .80 for boys).
Perceived school climate. Perceptions that one’s school
is tolerant of sexual harassment were assessed using an
adapted version of the Organizational Tolerance of Sexual
Harassment Scale (OTSH; Hulin et al., 1996). The OTSH
(overall α = .96) measures shared perceptions of whether
one’s organization tolerates sexual harassment.
The OTSH was adapted to a school context and students
were presented with five hypothetical scenarios of different types of sexual harassment directed toward female students4 : gender harassment (GH) by a male peer (e.g., “A
group of boys stand in the hallways or cafeteria and make
sexual comments or noises when girls walk by. The girls
are offended by the boys’ behavior.”), GH by a peer whose

High School Sexual Harassment
gender is not specified, GH by a teacher whose gender is not
specified, unwanted sexual attention (USA) by a male peer,
and USA by a male teacher. Following each scenario, respondents were asked if the target(s) of the harassment were
to complain to a school authority, to rate whether she/they
would incur risk, her/their complaint would be taken seriously, and the offender(s) would be disciplined. Each question was rated along a 5-point response scale ranging from 1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The 15 items (five
scenarios, each with three questions) were then summed,
with higher scores reflecting perceptions that the school
climate is more tolerant of sexual harassment (α = .88 for
girls and for boys).
Self-esteem. The 10-item Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale
(Rosenberg, 1965), a widely used measure of global selfesteem (Harned & Fitzgerald, 2002, report an alpha coefficient of .89 in a sample of adult women), was used to assess
respondents’ sense of self and abilities (e.g., “On the whole,
I am satisfied with myself”). Respondents rated the items
along a 4-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to
4 (strongly agree). The scale was scored by reversing five
items that were worded in a negative direction and summing the items such that higher scores indicated greater
self-esteem (α = .89 for girls and .87 for boys).
Psychological distress. An abbreviated version of the
Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI; Derogatis & Spencer,
1982), a self-report symptom scale designed to measure
symptoms of psychopathology, was used to measure psychological distress. The BSI consists of items describing a
variety of problems and complaints; Derogatis and Spencer
report adequate convergent and predictive validity in clinical and nonclinical samples. In the present study, three
dimensions of the BSI were tapped: depression (5 items;
e.g., “Feeling blue”), anxiety (7 items; e.g., “Feeling fearful”), and phobic anxiety (2 items; e.g., “Feeling afraid you
will faint in public”). Respondents were asked whether they
had experienced symptoms during the past week, and items
were rated on a 5-point scale from 0 (not at all) to 4 (extremely). The psychological distress scale was formed by
summing the 14 items such that higher scores reflected
greater distress (α = .89 for girls and for boys).
Health satisfaction. Health satisfaction was assessed via
a subscale of the Retirement Descriptive Index (Smith,
Kendall, & Hulin, 1969), which contains nine short descriptive phrases or adjectives reflecting respondents’ evaluation
of their own health (e.g., “Never felt better”). This subscale
has been found to be reliable and stable across a 2-year period (Smith et al., 1969), with a reported coefficient alpha
of .70 (Hanisch & Hulin, 1990). This scale has been used
reliably with individuals of various ages. For example, Lim
and Cortina (2005) reported an alpha coefficient of .74 with
women circuit court employees, ages 21–78 (mean age approximately 40 years), and Harned and Fitzgerald (2002)
reported an alpha coefficient of .82 with adult women.

119
Responses to these items were provided on a 3-point
scale from 1 (no) to 3 (yes). Following reverse scoring of
five items that indicated poor health, this scale was scored
by summing the nine items so that higher scores indicated
greater health satisfaction. Two items were dropped following psychometric analysis because of poor performance in
relation to the total scale; thus, health satisfaction was measured by a 7-item scale with alpha coefficients of .74 for
both girls and boys.
Negative body image. Preoccupation with body image
was assessed by a 10-item version of the Body Shape Questionnaire (BSQ-R-10; Mazzeo, 1999). The BSQ-R-10 assesses intensity of preoccupation with body image (e.g.,
“Have you felt ashamed of your body?”) during the past
4 weeks along a 6-point scale from 1 (never) to 6 (always). Mazzeo provided evidence for strong reliability and
criterion and construct validity when used with female
undergraduates. The average age in Mazzeo’s studies was
19.5 years, which suggests that the BSQ-R-10 would be
adequate for use with high school senior women. A slight
wording change was made to one item (changing “women”
to “people”) to adapt the scale for use with women and men.
The resulting strong alpha coefficients (α = .97 for girls
and .95 for boys) and the pattern of correlations between
the BSQ-R-10 and other measures of outcome (e.g., selfesteem and psychological distress; see Table 2) is strikingly
similar for both young women and men, which suggests that
the BSQ-R-10 can be adapted for use with young men. The
10 items were summed to form a scale score with higher
scores reflecting a negative preoccupation with body image.
Safety. Students’ perceptions of personal safety at
school were measured using four items (e.g., “I feel I can
walk down any hall of the high school and be safe”) from
the Student Safety Scale (α = .83; Collinsworth, 2000) that
were rated along a 5-point scale (1 = disagree to 5 = agree).
Scores on the items were summed to create a scale score
with high scores reflecting perceptions of safety at school
(α = .78 for girls and .77 for boys).
Withdrawal. Student withdrawal from school and class
activities was measured along a 5-point scale (1 = disagree
to 5 = agree) using four researcher-developed items (e.g.,
“I stay home from school a couple of times a month even
though I am not sick”). After reversing an item, scores on the
four items were summed to create a scale score with high
scores reflecting withdrawal from school (α = .59 for girls
and .56 for boys). This scale attempted to tap a wide range of
withdrawal behavior (e.g., thoughts of dropping out, skipping school, disinterest in school, and poor academic effort) with a limited number of items (correlations among
the items ranged from .21 to .37 for girls and .17 to .31 for
boys), thus producing a lower alpha coefficient. Although
correlations between withdrawal and other variables are as
expected (see Table 2), given the lower-than-desirable alpha
coefficients, results using this scale should be interpreted
cautiously.

120

ORMEROD ET AL.
RESULTS

Experiences of Harassment
Looking solely at frequencies, nearly all students reported
one or more experiences of peer harassment (95.5% of
girls and 88.4% of boys). However, the difference in mean
scores (see Table 1) for peer harassment (d = .71) indicates that there was a moderately large difference, with
girls having more frequent, upsetting experiences of peer
harassment. Approximately 53% of girls and 38% of boys
reported harassment from school adults with a difference in
mean scores of .38, indicating that the girls reported more
frequent, upsetting harassment from school personnel, but
the difference is smaller than in the case of peers (Cohen,
1988).
We conducted a hierarchical linear regression analysis
in SPSS to identify factors that contribute to peer harassment. We were interested in whether gender, perceived
tolerance for sexual harassment by school personnel, and
harassment by school personnel were significantly associated with experiences of peer harassment. Control variables
included length of time at school (to control for potential
differences in students’ experiences of harassment), school
attended, ethnicity (research is mixed about the relationship between ethnicity and harassment; e.g., Chesire, 2004;
Hand & Sanchez, 2000; Lee et al., 1996), and school grades
(likewise, research on the relationship between grades and
harassment has been mixed; e.g., Lee et al., 1996; Cardwell,
2000). Ethnicity and length of time at school were found
to be nonsignificant in these and subsequent analyses and
were dropped.
Variables were entered into the regression equation in
five blocks in the following order: high school, self-reported
grades, gender, school climate or tolerance for sexual harassment, and sexual harassment by school personnel. Missing
data were deleted listwise. We set R2 ≥ 1% of the variance explained as an additional criterion for determining
the significance of each variable. Table 3 summarizes the
results.
The regression model accounted for a significant 45.1%
of the variance in peer sexual harassment. As predicted,
more frequent, distressing peer harassment was associated
with perceptions that one’s school climate is tolerant of sexual harassment, more frequent, distressing harassment by
adult school personnel, and gender, with girls experiencing
more harassment, F(10, 478) = 39.23, p < .001.
Outcome Correlates for Adult Harassment, School
Climate, and Peer Harassment
We conducted hierarchical multiple linear regression analyses separately for girls and boys because it is unclear in the
literature whether the phenomenon of sexual harassment
is the same for women and men. Early research hypothesized that sexual harassment is a fundamentally different
experience for men than it is for women, with different

Table 3
Summary of Hierarchical Regression Analysis With Peer
Harassment as the Criterion
Step

Variable

1
2
3
4
5

Schoola
Grades
Gender
Climate
Adult SHb

β
−.084
−.223
.090
.548

R2
.031∗
.009
.118∗∗
.027∗∗
.266∗∗

a
Schools were dummy coded. β’s for schools are not shown to preserve
space and are available from the first author.
b
SH = sexual harassment. Adult school personnel or staff-to-student SH
and peer-to-peer SH were weighted by appraisal. Gender was coded such
that girls = 1 and boys = 2. N = 489.
∗
p < .05. ∗∗ p < .01.

frequencies for types of harassing behavior and men attributing different meanings and reactions to such experiences (Berdahl, Magley, & Waldo, 1996; Cochran, Frazier,
& Olson, 1997; Waldo, Berdahl, & Fitzgerald, 1998). Waldo
et al. (1998), in particular, noted that research should examine experiences of harassment to clarify the meaning of
harassment for male targets. In support of this, research
demonstrates that behaviors women consider sexually harassing are not similarly perceived by men (see, e.g., Rotundo, Nguyen, & Sackett, 2001, for a meta-analytic review
of gender differences in perceptions of harassment).
We examined whether harassment by school personnel,
students’ perceptions of school personnel’s tolerance for
sexual harassment (school climate), and peer harassment
were negatively associated with educational, psychological,
and health outcomes after controlling for the potential effects of school and grades. School and grades were entered
into the first step followed by sexual harassment by school
personnel in step 2, tolerance of harassment in step 3, and
peer harassment in step 4. We conducted a total of six regressions, regressing each outcome onto the variables described above. A p value of ≤ .008 (Bonferroni correction)
was utilized to control for Type I error. The standardized
beta coefficients and R2 for each outcome are presented
in Tables 4 and 5.
Psychological and physical well-being. In the model
predicting self-esteem for 12th-grade girls, 18.5% percent
of the variance was accounted for, F(10, 254) = 5.78, p <
.001. For boys, the model predicted 17.3% of the variance
for self-esteem, F(10, 200) = 4.20, p < .001. After controlling for school and grades and entering harassment by
school adults, school climate contributed a significant 3.6%
change in R2 in the model for girls and 6.1% in the boys’
model. Thus, as predicted, perceptions that one’s school is
tolerant of sexual harassment were associated with lower
self-esteem.
The regression models predicting negative body image accounted for a significant 12.3% of the variance for

High School Sexual Harassment

121
Table 4

Summary of Hierarchical Regression Analyses by Gender for Variables Predicting Self-Esteem, Negative Body Image,
Psychological Distress, Health Satisfaction
Self-Esteem

Step

Negative Body Image

Psychological Distress

Health Satisfaction

Girls
(n = 265)

Boys
(n = 211)

Girls
(n = 266)

Boys
(n = 218)

Girls
(n = 262)

Boys
(n = 214)

Girls
(n = 267)

Boys
(n = 217)

β

R2

β

R2

β

β

β

β

R2

β

R2

β

.115∗

.122

.080†

.025

.069† −.086

.072† −.128

.071† −.069

.060†

.185

.140∗

.149

.085†

.006†
.062
.061∗ −.023
.026†
.209

.028∗ −.233
.000†
.067
.026∗
.349

.001† −.176
.004†
.085
.078∗
.407

.007†
.017†
.096∗

.030†
.067
.087∗ −.125
.018† −.169

.003†
.112
.020† −.285
.017† −.151

.000†
.076∗
.015†

1 Schoola
.234
grades
2 Adult SHb
.015
3 Climate
−.169
4 Peer SHb −.187

.014†
.079
.036∗ −.249
.020† −.202

R2

R2

R2

.037
.309
.169

R2

Schools were dummy coded. β’s for schools are not shown to preserve space and are available from the first author.
SH = sexual harassment. Adult school personnel or staff-to-student SH and peer-to-peer SH were weighted by appraisal.
∗
p < .008. † ns.
a

b

Table 5
Summary of Hierarchical Regression Analyses by Gender for Variables Predicting Perceptions of
Safety at School and School Withdrawal
School Safety
Girls
(n = 270)
Step
1 Schoola grades
2 Adult SHb
3 Climate
4 Peer SHb

School Withdrawal

Boys
(n = 215)

Girls
(n = 268)

Boys
(n = 215)

β

R2

β

R2

β

R2

β

.250
.070
−.238
−.242

.195∗
.012†
.068∗
.034∗

.199
.023
−.190
−.126

.128∗
.006†
.033∗
.010†

−.381
−.002
.192
.091

.222∗
.007†
.039∗
.005†

−.275
−.038
.192
.079

R2
.170∗
.001†
.034∗
.004†

Schools were dummy coded. β’s for schools are not shown to preserve space and are available from the first author.
SH = sexual harassment. Adult school personnel or staff-to-student SH and peer-to-peer SH were weighted by appraisal.
∗
p < .008. † ns.
a

b

girls, F(10, 255) = 3.59, p < .001, and 15.5% for boys,
F(10, 207) = 3.80, p < .001. For girls, adult harassment significantly contributed 2.8% of the variance beyond school and grades. Peer-to-peer harassment significantly accounted for 2.6% of the variance beyond that
predicted by all other variables for girls and 7.8% of the variance for boys. These findings were also supportive of our
predictions.
The regression models accounted for a significant 19.2%
of the variance in psychological distress for 12th-grade girls,
F(10, 251) = 5.95, p < .001, and 19.5% of the variance in
psychological distress for boys, F(10, 203) = 4.93, p < .001.
According to the R2 for girls in Table 4, peer harassment was the sole significant predictor and accounted for
9.6% of the variance in psychological distress after all other
variables were entered into the model. School climate was
the sole significant predictor for boys, accounting for 8.7%
of the variance beyond that of school, grades, and harassment by school personnel. Thus, as expected, climate was
significantly associated with reports of negative psychological well-being for boys and peer harassment with negative
well-being for girls.

The regression model examining health satisfaction in
12th-grade girls accounted for a significant 18.0% of the
variance, F(10, 256) = 5.63, p < .001; however, beyond
school, no variables met the significance criteria of .008.
For senior boys, the regression models accounted for a significant 17.5% of the variance in health satisfaction, F(10,
206) = 4.38, p < .001, with school climate as the only significant predictor.
School outcomes. The regression model accounted for
a significant 31% of the variance in feelings of safety at
school for 12th-grade girls, F(10, 259) = 11.65, p < .001,
and 17.7% for boys, F(10, 204) = 4.40, p < .001. As shown
in Table 5, school climate significantly predicted 6.8% of
the variance for girls and 3.3% for boys, but peer harassment was significant for girls alone (3.4% of the variance).
For both girls and boys, a school climate that is tolerant
of harassment was associated with feeling unsafe while at
school. For girls, peer harassment was also associated with
feeling unsafe.
For girls, the regression model accounted for a significant 27.2% of the variance in withdrawal from school,

122

ORMEROD ET AL.

F(10, 257) = 9.61, p < .001. For boys, the regression
model accounted for a significant 20.9% of the variance,
F(10, 204) = 5.40, p < .001. After controlling for school
and grades, school climate significantly contributed 3.9%
of the variance for girls and 3.4% for boys, as expected.
DISCUSSION
Results of our study support earlier findings that students
report high rates of peer sexual harassment in high school.
However, the meaning of such behavior appears to be somewhat different for boys and girls; to better understand the
nature of these experiences, it is important to look beyond
simple incident rates to those variables that are linked with
harassment. In the first regression equation, gender was
strongly associated with peer harassment, with girls experiencing more peer harassment than boys. In the following
set of regression models, experiences of sexual harassment
were directly and negatively associated with three of six outcomes for girls but only one for boys. Further, when looking
at the difference in mean scores for harassment, girls experienced more harassment by peers and adult school personnel than did boys. Taken together, these findings support
that sexual harassment in the schools is not a uniform experience, however widespread; rather, it appears to be a
gendered phenomenon that is directly and negatively associated with outcomes for girls.
Current findings support the importance of including a
measure of cognitive appraisal when assessing harassment.
Our measure weighted distressing experiences more heavily, reflecting a range of experiences from the nondisturbing
to those that were threatening or stressful. Consistent with
Lazarus and Folkman’s (1984) theory and findings from the
literature (Duffy et al., 2004; Langhout et al., 2005; Reed,
2004), the association between harassment and outcome
was likely influenced by the strength of the cognitive appraisals. Senior male students reported fewer, less upsetting
experiences of harassment and in turn had far fewer stressrelated consequences directly associated with harassment.
That girls had more frequent, distressing experiences of
sexual harassment is in line with theories of power differentials discussed in the introduction. Although peer-to-peer
harassment occurs between teenagers of relatively the same
age and position within the school (i.e., students), a structural power differential between males and females can be
conceptualized as playing out in the schools as it does in
the outside world. Given this imbalance, girls may experience harassment as more threatening because they have
been socialized within a larger cultural context in which
women are more vulnerable to victimization and viewed as
less powerful than men.
A key finding was that the damaging effects of harassment extended beyond those who were directly harmed by
it to others in the environment. For example, school climate was associated with experiences of sexual harassment
and school quality of life. For girls and boys, climate was

related to feeling unsafe while at school, withdrawal from
school, and feelings of lowered self-esteem. For boys, a
negative climate, that is, a climate that tolerates the harassment of girls, was the only major variable associated with
negative psychological, health, and educational outcomes
with the exception of body image. Given that boys are harassed less frequently and appraise their experiences as less
upsetting, these findings suggest that boys may suffer negative consequences regardless of whether they are targets
of harassment. Supportive of this possibility, Dupper and
Meyer-Adams (2002) have argued that those who witness
peer harassment (and those who commit such acts) can be
at risk for negative outcomes. It is reasonable that school
climate plays such an important role because high school
students are at a developmental period when their peers
are an important part of their everyday lives as well as influential in the formation of their self and group identities.
Considering this developmental position, it is logical that a
climate that tolerates the harassment of peers would have
a negative impact on teenagers, regardless of whether they
are direct victims.
In line with an organizational perspective on climate for
harassment, the shared perceptions that those who harass
girls will not be disciplined, that girls’ complaints will not
be taken seriously, and that it would be risky for a girl to
complain was strongly associated with negative outcomes.
For both boys and girls, it is plausible that observing those
with little recourse being victimized while authorities tacitly
sanction the behavior by ignoring it may send a larger message about justice that has a negative influence on their wellbeing. Findings from the workplace support that observing
harassment and incivility toward women (coworkers) is associated with poorer psychological and work outcomes for
men and women (Miner-Rubino & Cortina, 2007). Studies
of ambient harassment (exposure to the harassment of others) find that the effects of sexual harassment in the workplace go beyond the target. For example, perceptions that
one’s organization tolerates sexual harassment were found
to predict increased ambient harassment, and ambient harassment was associated with less job satisfaction and more
psychological distress (Glomb et al., 1997). Indeed, the harassment occurring to women targets in a work environment
has been linked to detrimental effects for male coworkers
(Richman-Hirsch & Glomb, 2002).
Similar to Lee et al. (1996), we conceptualized harassment by adult school personnel as an index of school climate such that school personnel harassing students is an
abuse of power capable of sending a message that harassment will go unpunished and is thus acceptable. This message is considered gendered because the harassment of
students by adults was more likely for female students.
Surprisingly, and contrary to our predictions, harassment
by adults was not related to outcomes, with the exception of body image for girls. Future research might examine the relationships among harassment by school personnel, school climate, peer harassment, and outcomes more

High School Sexual Harassment
closely to better understand those processes that inhibit
such behavior and facilitate a school climate that does not
tolerate sexual harassment. Recent work by Sims (2005)
offers an explicit definition of climate as leader behavior,
and although her definition is limited to perceptions about
leader responses to harassment in the environment, an extension is to consider the effect of leaders-who-harass (e.g.,
school authorities) on the behavior of their subordinates
(e.g., students). This is especially important to consider in a
school context where the difference between a peer and a
person with supervisory authority is far greater than in the
workplace.
We expected that health satisfaction would be related to
sexual harassment given that a recent study of young women
found a direct relationship (e.g., Huerta et al., 2006). However, other research finds that the relationship between
health perceptions and harassment is mediated by psychological status (e.g., Fitzgerald, Drasgow, Hulin, Gelfand, &
Magley, 1997), which may be why harassment did not directly predict health satisfaction in our regression models.
It was surprising that the relationship between harassment
and self-esteem was not significant given that previous research links the two for adult women and finds harassment
associated with drops in confidence for adolescents. Recent
research suggests that self-esteem may have a more complex relationship to harassment and appraisal than simply
that of an outcome (Wright & Fitzgerald, 2007). Future research might examine the role of self-esteem in relation to
vulnerability to harm from harassment, particularly using
longitudinal data, so that directionality can be considered.
Limitations
It is important to consider the findings in the context of the
study’s limitations. The sample was one of convenience and
may not generalize to other school settings; in addition, the
sample was exclusively seniors and may not describe harassment experiences of students in earlier grades. Some of
our measures were adapted from those used with adults in
the workplace. In particular, we could not find any studies
in which our measure of health satisfaction was used with
high school seniors. On the other hand, this measure has
been used with adults of all ages, and its pattern of correlations with other variables were as expected, suggesting that
it functions adequately with this age group. However, results related to this measure should not be overstated, and
its use with high school seniors should be validated in an
unrelated sample. Our measure of withdrawal from school
did not have adequate reliability, likely due to its being brief
and including a wide range of withdrawal behaviors. Findings related to withdrawal should be viewed cautiously and
future studies should include additional items to strengthen
the scale.
Despite conceptualizing some variables as predictors
and others as outcomes, our findings are correlational and
cross-sectional, and we cannot say for certain whether these

123
findings would hold in a longitudinal study of the same variables. Indeed, prospective designs are a particularly rich
area for future research. Our data were collected via selfreport and were single source, which could lead to common
method variance and response set bias. As noted above,
we attempted to minimize bias by placing those measures
thought of as outcomes prior to, and independent of, harassment and climate. If mono-method bias were present, one
would expect correlations among harassment, climate, and
outcomes to be fairly uniform; however, the correlations in
Table 2 display a range and include those near zero.
Finally, there is some research that suggests that sexual
harassment is a fundamentally different experience for men
and women (e.g., Waldo et al., 1998). For this reason, we approached this research cautiously and examined outcomes
separately for boys and girls. However, given that this is an
unresolved issue in the literature, our measure of sexual harassment may not have adequately tapped those behaviors
that boys find harassing. Certainly, this is an area in which
future research would be valuable.
Implications and Conclusions
This study attempted to address methodological limitations
in previous research using multi-item measures of harassment that are behavioral, as well as theoretically grounded,
and that link cognitive appraisal to actual experiences. Our
findings advance the study of sexual harassment in the
schools and take us a step closer to understanding students’
experiences. Both boys and girls suffer when in an environment where peer harassment is allowed to flourish. An
implication of our research is that those who work in and
attend secondary schools need to address those factors that
can create a positive climate where harassment is not tolerated. Given previous research that students perceive teachers and staff as ignoring harassment (AAUW, 1993; Dupper & Meyer-Adams, 2002; Hand & Sanchez, 2000; Lee
et al., 1996) and our findings that when students perceive
that teachers and administrators tolerate sexual harassment,
there is a corresponding increase in peer harassment, this
issue obviously needs to be addressed. We also argue that
school personnel not lose sight of sexual harassment as a
gendered phenomenon when planning prevention and intervention strategies. Girls are particularly targeted with
sexual harassment, appraise it as more distressing, and experience a wider array of negative outcomes directly associated with harassment. It is essential that policies and programs designed to intervene include an understanding of
the gendered nature of harassment. Further, we encourage
researchers and school administrators to partner together
to develop and test interventions for the purpose of reducing harassment and addressing the direct and indirect harm
that results from such behavior.
Initial submission: February 5, 2007
Initial acceptance: November 11, 2007
Final acceptance: December 18, 2007

124

ORMEROD ET AL.

NOTES
1. In contrast, an analog study of teacher perceptions found that
teachers were able to identify peer harassing behaviors, were
intolerant of such behaviors, and were willing to take appropriate action to stop harassment (Stone & Couch, 2004).
2. Thank you to a reviewer for suggesting this sentence.
3. We weighted the frequency ratings of harassment by appraisal
ratings as described in the Method section. All of our analyses
utilize these weighted scores except when examining the mean
difference scores for harassment. For brevity’s sake, we often
refer to our findings using these weighted scores as simply “harassment.” However, to remind the reader that our findings
include both frequency and appraisal, we sometimes refer to
both components (e.g., “frequent, upsetting harassment,” “frequency and appraisal”).
4. There is a small body of research on ambient sexual harassment that finds an association between women’s experiences
with harassment and negative effects on men in their same environment. For example, Richman-Hirsch and Glomb (2002)
examined whether the general level of the sexual harassment
of women in a workgroup has an effect on the men in the
workgroup and found that ambient sexual harassment (indirect exposure to sexual harassment) can be harmful to men.

REFERENCES
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation. (1993). Hostile hallways: The AAUW survey on sexual
harassment in America’s schools. Washington, DC: Author.
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation. (2001). Hostile hallways: Bullying, teasing, and sexual
harassment in school. Washington, DC: Author.
Arvey, R. D., & Cavanaugh, M. A. (1995). Using surveys to assess
the prevalence of sexual harassment: Some methodological
problems. Journal of Social Issues, 57, 117–138.
Berdahl, J. L., Magley, V. J., & Waldo, C. R. (1996). The sexual
harassment of men? Psychology of Women Quarterly, 20,
527–547.
Cardwell, T. R. (2000). The effects of peer sexual harassment on
high school girls and the moderating effects of mother attachment, father attachment, and school climate on grades,
career decision-making self-efficacy, career aspirations, and
a composite of negative school indicators. Dissertation Abstracts International, 61, 8B (UMI No. 9984938).
Chesire, D. J. (2004). Test of an integrated model for high school
sexual harassment. Dissertation Abstracts International, 66,
11B (UMI No. 3196663).
Cochran, C. C., Frazier, P. A., & Olson, A. M. (1997). Predictors
of responses to unwanted sexual attention. Psychology of
Women Quarterly, 21, 207–226.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Collinsworth, L. L. (2000). Sexual harassment in high school. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign.
Corbett, K., Gentry, C. S., & Pearson, W. (1993). Sexual harassment in high school. Youth and Society, 25, 93–103.
Craig, W. M., Pepler, D., Connolly, J., & Henderson, K. (2001).
Developmental context of peer harassment in early adoles-

cence: The role of puberty and the peer group. In J. Juvonen
& S. Graham (Eds.), Peer harassment in school: The plight
of the vulnerable and victimized (pp. 242–261). New York:
Guilford.
Derogatis, L. R., & Spencer, P. M. (1982). The Brief Symptom Inventory: Administration, scoring, and procedures manual–
I. Baltimore: Clinical Psychometric Research.
Duffy, J., Wareham, S., & Walsh, M. (2004). Psychological consequences for high school students of having been sexually
harassed. Sex Roles, 50, 811–821.
Dupper, D. R., & Meyer-Adams, N. (2002). Low-level violence:
A neglected aspect of school culture. Urban Education, 37,
350–364.
Fineran, S., & Bennett, L. (1999). Gender and power issues of
peer sexual harassment among teenagers. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 14, 626–641.
Fitzgerald, L. F., Drasgow, F., Hulin, C. L., Gelfand, M. J., & Magley, V. J. (1997). Antecedents and consequences of sexual
harassment in organizations: A test of an integrated model.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 578–589.
Fitzgerald, L. F., Gelfand, M. J., & Drasgow, F. (1995). Measuring
sexual harassment: Theoretical and psychometric advances.
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 17, 425–445.
Fitzgerald, L. F., Hulin, C. L., & Drasgow, F. (1995). The antecedents and consequences of sexual harassment in organizations: An integrated model. In G. P. Keita & J. J. Hurrell,
Jr. (Eds.). Job stress in a changing workforce: Investigating
gender, diversity, and family issues (pp. 55–74). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Fitzgerald, L. F., Shullman, S., Bailey, N., Richards, M., Swecker,
J., Gold, Y., et al. (1988). The incidence and dimensions of
sexual harassment in academia and the workplace. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 32, 152–175.
Fitzgerald, L. F., Swan, S., & Fischer, K. (1995). Why didn’t she
just report him? The psychological and legal implications of
women’s responses to sexual harassment. Journal of Social
Issues, 51, 117–138.
Fitzgerald, L. F., Swan, S., & Magley, V. J. (1997). But was it really sexual harassment? Legal, behavioral, and psychological
definitions of the workplace victimization of women. In W.
O’Donohue (Eds.), Sexual harassment: Theory, research,
and treatment (pp. 5–28). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Gelfand, M. J., Fitzgerald, L. F., & Drasgow, F. (1995). The structure of sexual harassment: A confirmatory analysis across
cultures and settings. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 47,
164–177.
Glomb, T. M., Richman, W. L., Hulin, C. L., Drasgow, F., Schneider, K. T., & Fitzgerald, L. F. (1997). Ambient sexual harassment: An integrated model of antecedents and consequences. Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes, 71, 309–328.
Grube, B., & Lens, V. (2003). Student to student harassment: The
impact of Davis v. Monroe. Children & Schools, 25, 173–
185.
Gutek, B. A., & Koss, M. P. (1993). Changed women and changed
organizations: Consequences of and coping with sexual harassment. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 42, 28–48.
Hand, J. Z., & Sanchez, L. (2000). Badgering or bantering? Gender differences in experience of, and reactions to, sexual
harassment among U.S. high school students. Gender &
Society, 14, 718–746.

High School Sexual Harassment
Hanisch, K. A., & Hulin, C. L. (1990). Job attitudes and organizational withdrawal: An examination of retirement and other
voluntary withdrawal behaviors. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 37, 60–78.
Harned, M. S. (2000). Harassed bodies: An examination of the
relationships among women’s experiences of sexual harassment, body image, and eating disturbances. Psychology of
Women Quarterly, 24, 336–348.
Harned, M. S., & Fitzgerald, L. F. (2002). Understanding the link
between sexual harassment and eating disorder symptoms:
A mediational analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 70, 1170–1181.
Houston, S., & Hwang, N. (1996). Correlates of the objective and
subjective experiences of sexual harassment in high school.
Sex Roles, 34, 189–204.
Huerta, M., Cortina, L. M., Pang, J. S., Torges, C. M., & Magley,
M. J. (2006). Sex and power in the academy: Modeling sexual harassment in the lives of college women. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 616–628.
Hulin, C., Fitzgerald, L. F., & Drasgow, F. (1996). Organizational
influences on sexual harassment. In M. S. Stockdale (Ed.),
Sexual harassment in the workplace: Perspectives, frontiers,
and response strategies (pp. 127–150). London: Sage.
Koss, M. P. (1990). Changed lives: The psychological impact of
sexual harassment. In M. A. Paludi (Ed.), Ivory power: Sexual harassment on campus (pp. 73–92). Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.
Langhout, R. D., Bergman, M. E., Cortina, L. M., Fitzgerald, L. F.,
Drasgow, F., & Williams, J. H. (2005). Sexual harassment
severity: Assessing situational and personal determinants
and outcomes. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 35,
975–1007.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping.
New York: Springer.
Lee, V. E., Croninger, R. G., Linn, E., & Chen, X. (1996). The culture of sexual harassment in secondary schools. American
Educational Research Journal, 33, 383–417.
Lim, S., & Cortina, L. M. (2005). Interpersonal mistreatment in
the workplace: The interface and impact of general incivility
and sexual harassment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90,
483–496.
Magley, V. J., Hulin, C. L., Fitzgerald, L. F., & DeNardo, M.
(1999). Outcomes of self-labeling sexual harassment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 390–402.
Mazzeo, S. E. (1999). Modification of an existing measure of body
image preoccupation and its relationship to disordered eating in female college students. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 46, 42–50.
Miner-Rubino, K., & Cortina, L. M. (2007). Beyond targets: Consequences of vicarious exposure to misogyny at work. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 1254–1269.
Munson, L. J., Miner, A. G., & Hulin, C. (2001). Labeling sexual
harassment in the military: An extension and replication.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 293–303.
Pryor, J. B., Giedd, J. L., & Williams, K. B. (1995). A social psychological model for predicting sexual harassment. Journal
of Social Issues, 51, 69–84.
Pryor, J. B., & Whalen, N. J. (1997). A typology of sexual harassment: Characteristics of harassers and the social cir-

125
cumstances under which sexual harassment occurs. In W.
O’Donohue (Ed.), Sexual harassment: Theory, research,
and treatment (pp. 129–151). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Reed, M. E. (2004). The psychological impact of sexual harassment
and previous sexual victimization in a sample of class action litigants. Dissertation Abstracts International, 65, 11B
(UMI No. 3153410).
Richman-Hirsch, W. L., & Glomb, T. M. (2002). Are men affected
by the sexual harassment of women? Effects of ambient sexual harassment on men. In J. M. Brett & F. Drasgow (Eds.),
The psychology of work: Theoretically based empirical research (pp. 121–140). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self image.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rotundo, M., Nguyen, D., & Sackett, P. R. (2001). A metaanalytic review of gender differences in perceptions of sexual harassment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 914–
922.
Sabella, R. A. (2001). Faces of sexual harassment in schools. In
D. S. Sandhu (Ed.), Faces of violence: Psychological correlates, concepts, and intervention strategies (pp. 251–267).
Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Schneider, K. T., Swan, S., & Fitzgerald, L. F. (1997). Job-related
and psychological effects of sexual harassment in the workplace: Empirical evidence from two organizations. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 82, 401–415.
Sims, C. S. (2005). Reconceptualizing the role of climate in sexual harassment. Dissertation Abstracts International, 67,
1B (UMI No. 3202171).
Smith, P. C., Kendall, L., & Hulin, C. L. (1969). The measurement of satisfaction in work and retirement. Chicago: Rand
McNally.
Stone, M., & Couch, S. (2004). Peer sexual harassment among
high school students: Teachers’ attitudes, perceptions, and
responses. The High School Journal, 88, 1–13.
Stratton, S. D., & Backes, J. S. (1997). Sexual harassment in North
Dakota public schools: A study of eight high schools. High
School Journal, 80, 163–172.
Strauss, S. (2003). Sexual harassment in K-12. In M. Paludi & C. A.
Paludi, Jr. (Eds.), Academic and workplace sexual harassment: A handbook of cultural, social science, management,
and legal perspectives (pp. 105–145). Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Timmerman, G. (2004). Adolescents’ psychological health and experiences with unwanted sexual behavior at school. Adolescence, 39, 817–825.
vanRoosmalen, E., & McDaniel, S. A. (1998). Sexual harassment in
academia: A hazard to women’s health. Women and Health,
28, 33–54.
Waldo, C. R., Berdahl, J. L., & Fitzgerald, L. F. (1998). Are men
sexually harassed? If so, by whom? Law and Human Behavior, 22, 59–79.
Williams, J. H., Fitzgerald, L. F., & Drasgow, F. (1999). The effects of organizational practices on sexual harassment and
individual outcomes in the military. Military Psychology,
11, 303–328.
Wright, C. V., & Fitzgerald, L. F. (2007). Angry and afraid:
Women’s appraisal of sexual harassment during litigation.
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 31, 73–84.

