American Journal of Orthopqchiatrys68(4).October 1998

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SEXUAL AND SEVERE PHYSICAL VIOLENCE
AMONG HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS
Power Beliefs, Gender, and Relationship
Larry Bennett, Ph.D., and Susan Fineran, Ph.D.

In a sample of 463 high school students, 43% reported being the victim of either
sexual violence or severe physical violence by peers in the past year. Perpetrators were more likely to be known rather than unknown to the victim, or to be
datindex-dating partners, and 70% of those who experienced violence by peers
were girls. Findings support a view of high school peer violence that encompasses relationship, gender, efsects on the victim, and beliefs about both male
role power and personal power.

T

he rate of dating violence and sexual ships, and have not looked at other possible
violence among high school students relationships between offender and victim,
does not differ substantially from the rate such as individuals who know each other
of such violence among college students or but are not dating, or between peers who
other adults. Bergman (1992) reported dat- are strangers.
ing and sexual violence rates of 24% and
A variety of risk factors have been asso15%, respectively, against girls and 9% and ciated with physical and sexual abuse in
4% against boys. Rates of dating violence this population: peer approval of violence,
reported in the literature have ranged from early sexual activity, history of delinquent
7% to 39% (Bergman, 1992; DeKeseredy behavior, and problems with alcohol or drugs
& Schwartz, 1994; O’Keefe, Brockopp, & (Lavoie, Hebert, & &fort, 1995); low gradeChew, 1986; Reuterman & Bur+, 1989; point average, number of dating partners,
Roscoe & Callahan, 1985). Reports o f sex- and dating frequency (Bergman, 1992); and
ual violence against high school students sex role attitudes (Bookwala,Frieze, Smith,
have ranged from 3% to 23% for girls and & Ryan, 1992). Gender as a risk factor is of2% to 4% for boys (Bergman, 1992; Can- ten debated. A number of investigatorshave
terbury, Grossman, & Lloyd, 1993; Davis, reported equivalent rates of intimate vioPeck, & Strorment, 1993; DeKeseredy & lence by gender among both adolescents
&hnwiz, 1994; Vicary, Klingaman, & Kark- and adults, launching debates about the
ness, 1995).Most studies of violence among meaning of this apparent equivalency ( K m ,
high school students have examined the 1993; Straw, 1993). However, the common
subject in dating or former dating relation- experience of researchers and practitioners
A revised version of apaperpresented at the 1997 annual meeting of the American Orthopsychiatric Association, in Toronto. Authors are at: Jane Addams College of Social Work, University of Illinois at Chicago (Bennett); and Boston University School of Social Work (Fineran).

0 1998 American OrthopsychiatricAssociation, Inc.

645

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

VIOLENCE AMONG HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS

alike suggests differentiation by gender is
indispensable in discussions of interpersonal violence.
Thompson’s (1991) study of college dating relationships found that gender orientation, rather than gender, was associated
with physical aggression by students,
where masculine orientation and relationship seriousness were the two strongest
predictors of both men’s and women’s dating violence. High school students view
peer violence by girls as a reaction to external events (e.g., pressure for sex, or maleinitiated violence), but attribute boys’ violence either to factors that tend to reduce
responsibility (e.g., alcohol) or to the desire to dominate women (Gagne & Lavoie,
1993). The view that adolescent female violence toward males is often reactive to
male-initiated violence echoes the adult domestic violence literature (Saundes, 1988).
As many as one in three males indicate that
their dating violence is an attempt to intimidate or force female compliance with their
demands (Sugarman & Hotaling, 1989).
In addition to gender, power is a variable
that potentially adds to our understanding
of violence. “Power orientation” describes
an individual’s motivation to control people and situations (McLellan4 197.5).Power
may be manifest in personal motivation or
self-efficacy (personal power); peer group
status (interpersonal power); or a sense of
entitlement derived from legal, procedural,
or ideological structures (structural power)
(Archer, 1994). Dutton (1988) argued that
the combination of male power motivation
and ambivalence about closeness results in
increasing attempts to control the socioemotional distance between males and their
female partners. Dutton and Browning
(1988) showed videotaped scenes of adult
marital conflict and found that physically
abusive men reacted more strongly to
scenes of abandonment than did either
maritally conflicted men or nonabusive
men. Jealousy, one of the sequelae to perceived abandonment by a partner, is frequently cited by participants in dating vio-

lence research as an important precipitant
of violence. It is logical to think that power, particularly power derived from beliefs
about male roles and entitlement, may be
an important determinant of violence among
high school students.
The present study examines physical and
sexual violence in a sample of high school
students. It hypothesizes that: 1) the incidence of reported victimization by, and utilization of, peer violence is equivalent in
male and female students, but female students experience a greater degree of threat
from the victimization; 2) the incidence of
victimization and utilization of violence
differs according to the relationship between victim and perpetrator; 3) violent
students, independent of gender and across
relational contexts, have higher levels of
both personal power and male sex role beliefs; and 4) victims of violence are more
likely than nonvictims to utilize violence.
METHODOLOGY

A secondary analysis of data was conducted from an earlier cross-sectional
study of peer sexual harassment in 342
Chicago high school students (Fineran &
Bennett, inpress). To this sample was added
an additional sample of 121 Chicago-area
high school students from a working-class
suburb, bringing the total to 463 participants. Students had completed a 20-minute
questionnaire in either a required English
class or a required study hall. The participants were typical for high school students
of the Chicago metropolitan area. Mean
age was 16.1 years, ranging from 14 to 20.
Forty-one percent were male. Forty percent
described themselves as “A” or “B’students, and 40% worked part-time outside
school. Racial identification was diverse:
African American, 34%; Latino, 21%;
white, 23%; other, 16%.
Measures
Sexual and severe physical violence. The
frequency of physical violence in the past
school year was measured by a single item

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

BENNETT AND FINERAN
drawn from the questionnaire: “How frequently in the past school year have you
been punched, kicked, or beaten?“ Frequency choices were: never, once or twice, a
few times a month, every few days, or
daily. By means of the same metric and
phrasing, the student was also asked to indicate how frequently he or she utilized
physical violence against other students.
Sexual violence in the past school year was
measured using two items on the same
five-point metric: frequency with which
others I) L‘pressuredyou to do something
sexual against your will”; and 2) “attempted to rape or raped you.” To facilitate
analysis, these two items were combined
into a single sexual abuse item. As with the
physical violence question, the students
were also asked how often they employed
each of these two forms of behavior, and
their responses were combined into a single item. (Unfortunately, use of single-item
measures may lead to an underestimation of
violence.)
Threat. Measurement of violence should
include the effect on the victim. For the severe physical violence item, and for each
of the two items on the sexual violence index, students indicated on a four-point
scale (“not at all” to “very much”) how upset or threatened they felt.
Relationship. Relationships in this study
were limited to school peers. Students who
had reported physical or sexual victimization subsequently indicated whether the
perpetrator was most likely a stranger, a
known peer, or a datinglex-dating partner.
Those who reported having used physical
or sexual violence similarly specified the
relationship with their target. It should be
noted that limiting violence to peer relationships in the school leads to underreporting the total level of violence. The way
questions were structured in the original
questionnaire makes the relationship variable three mutually exclusive categories of
a single variable, rather than three variables, limiting our ability to fully identify
the variation in relationships. Many stu-

dents have experiences with violence
across more than one relationship, but the
relationship variable here measures the relationship where the student is most likely
to experience or utilize violence.
Gender. Respondents indicated their gender; the gender of the perpetrator (for the
victimization questions); and the gender of
the victim (for the utilization questions). Unfortunately, gender of victim and perpetrator were collected only at the urban high
school, representing 74% of the total sample.
Power. This study focuses on two dimensions of power: male sex role power
and personal power. The Heterosexual Relationships Scale (HRS) quantifies male
sex role power, or the “belief that men
should dominate women, perceptions of
the opposite sex as sex objects, and views
that sex involves conquest” (Hall, Howard
& Boezio, 1986,p . 108). The HRS is selfadministered and consists of 12 items on a
four-point scale ranging from “strongly
agree” to “strongly disagree.” A typical
item in the HRS is: “A guy has got to show
a girl who’s boss or she’ll end up bossing
him.” To quantify personal power, the selfconfidence subscale of the Index of Personal Reactions (Bennett, 1986) was used.
The scale consists of ten items on a fivepoint scale, from “not at all characteristic
of me” to “very much characteristic of me.”
RESULTS

Of the 463 students in the sample, 147
(32%) reported having been the victim of
severe physical violence (punched, kicked,
or beaten) during the index school year; 42
(9%) indicated they had been the victim of
severe physical violence more than twice
that year. As for their own use of severe
physical violence, 146 (32%) admitted having done so, 70 of them (15%) more than
twice during the year. Of those who reported using severe physical violence, 52%
reported having been the victim of severe
violence in the same year.
For sexual violence, 103 students (22%)
reported being a victim once or twice dur-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

648

VIOLENCE AMONG HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS

ing the year, with 38 (8%)having been victimized more than twice. Twenty-six students (6%) reported that they utilized sexual violence in the current school year, and
9 (2%) did so more than twice. Since dating violence may include both physical and
sexual abuse, a redundant measure of severe dating violence was created by combining sexual and severe physical violence
for students who indicated their perpetrator
or victim was in a dating or ex-dating relationship. In this sample of high school students, 70 (1 5%) reported having been victims of severe dating violence and 2 1 (5%)
admitted being perpetrators in the current
school year.
TABLE1 breaks out the prevalence of severe physical and sexual violence by relationship, gender, and direction (victim and
offender). It also includes the rates for the
redundant category of severe dating violence by gender and direction. The rate for
sexual violence victimization in the study
sample is similar to that of other studies
(Bergman, 1992) but the rates of physical
and dating violence are lower than in some
other studies because the present study limited physical violence to more severe
forms, such as punching, kicking, or beating. It should also be recalled that, not only
are the data limited to severe physical
abuse, but to severe physical abuse by
peers. Violence from and toward adults
and non-high school students is excluded.
Also excluded is emotional abuse, another
form of violence that has been found to be
directly related to levels of physical dating

violence (Molidar, 1995). Combining the
categories of sexual and severe physical violence, 43% of the students reported having been the victim of either severe physical or sexual violence, and 34% reported
having used sexual or severe physical violence in the past school year. By any standards chosen, a substantial portion of these
students were involved in violence within
the year.
Unlike the research by Bergman (1992),
the present study found no differences in
rates of offense or victimization between
the urban and the suburban schools. Rates
of violence were not associated with year
in school, age, parents’ education, or race.
Students who did not have at least a “B”
average were more likely to haye used sexual violence in the last year ( x =4.9, df-2,
N=449,p<.03), but there were no other differences by academic average.
Five of the six violence variables differed in rate by gender. Across all relationships, boys were more likely to have been
the victim of physical violence (x2=4.6,
df-2, N=4493p<.05),to have used physical
violence ( x =4.8, df-2, N=437, p;.05),
and to have used sexual violence ( x =7.1,
df-2, N=439, p<.Ol). Girls were more
likely to have been the victim of dating violence (x2=10.7,df-2, N=453, p<.Ol) and
sexual violence across all relationships
(X2=4.99,dfi2, N=449, p<.05). There were
no statistically significant gender differences in rates of dating violence utilization.
Gender proportions differed according to
the type of violence employed. Of the 109

Table 1
RATES OF SEVERE PHYSICAL AND SEXUAL VIOLENCE VICTIMIZATION AND UTILIZATION
DURING THE PAST SCHOOL YEAR BY GENDER AND BY RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN VICTIM AND OFFENDER
UNKNOWN PEERS
KNOWN PEERS
TYPVDIRECTION
OF VIOLENCE
BOY
GIRL
BOY
GIRL
15
7
18
10
Victim-Severe Physical
Offender-Severe Physical
10
4
20
18
Victim-Sexual
1
2
6
6
Offender-Sexual
1
0
3
1
Victim-Dating Violence
Offender-Dating Violence
Note. Figures are %s of N=483 Chicaao-area hiah school students.

DATINGIEX-DATING
BOY
GIRL
3
1
6
4
9
5

6
2
16
1
20
4

BENNETT AND FINERAN

649

Table 2

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PROPORTIONSOF SAMESEX AND
DIFFERENTSEX OFFENDERS BY GENDER,
RELATIONSHIP,AND TYPE OF VIOLENCE
RELATIONSHIP
UNKNOWN KNOWN
DATING
TYPE OF VIOLENCE
Physical (M)
( M O )
(N=41)
(N=l8)
Boy offender/Girl victim
15%
20%
72%
Boy offender/Boy victim
55
46
0
Girl offender/Boy victim
2
5
16
Girl offender/Girl victim
28
0
29

-

100%

(N=2)
0%
0
50
50

(N=25)
64%
4
28
4

(N=40)
70%
0
25

100%

100%

-

100%

Sexual (N=67)
Boy offender/Girl victim
Boy offender/Boy victim
Girl offender/Boy victim
Girl offendedGirl victim

100%

-

-

5
100%

cases of severe physical violence, 69% of
the perpetrators were boys. Some 40% of
the violence was boy on boy, 29% boy on
girl, 24% girl on girl, and 7% girl on boy.
For 74 cases of sexual violence, 66% were
boy perpetrators and girl victims, 27% girl
on boy, 5% girl on girl, and one case of boy
on boy sexual abuse.
As hypothesized, girls were more adversely effected by all three types of violence. The gender differences in reaction
were statistically significant for both physical ( ~ 2 . 7 ,df-142, p<.Ol) and sexual
( ~ 3 . 9df-106,
,
p<.OOl) violence. There
were no significant gender differences in
reaction to dating violence.
The hypothesis that the frequency of severe physical violence and sexual violence
would differ by relationship between victim and perpetrator was supported only for

physical violence, where the frequency of
violence in dating and ex-dating relationships was significantly greater than the frequency of physical violence between unknown peers and between known peers
(F=9.8, df;139, p<.OOl). Differences in
the frequency of sexual violence are inconclusive due to the low rates of reported sexual violence and victimization by strangers. While the prevalence of severe physical violence was greater between unknown
peers and between known peers, the frequency with which physical violence occurred was greater in intimate and formerly
intimate relationships.
The gender proportions of offenders and
victims differ across relationship and type
of violence. This finding is summarized in
TABLE 2, which shows that boy-boy violence was the modal form of gendered violence between peers who did know one another, as well as between those who were
strangers to one another.
TABLE3 portrays the hypothesized relationship between the two power measures
and the frequency of victimization, namely
that violent students, independent of gender and across relational contexts, would
have higher levels of both personal power
beliefs and male role power beliefs. The
strength of both personal and male role
power beliefs was greater for perpetrators
than nonperpetrators of severe physical,
sexual, and dating violence, although some
differences are not significantly large.
There were no significant gender differ-

Table 3
MEAN PERSONAL POWER AND MALE ROLE POWER SCORES FOR VICTIMS,
NONVICTIMS, PERPETRATORS, AND NONPERPETRATORS
VICTIM
M P E OF VIOLENCE
Physical Violence
Personal power
Male role power
Sexual Violence
Personal power
Male role power
Dating Violence
Personal power
Male role Dower
' p . 0 5 ; **p.OOl.

PERPETRATOR

NO

YES

f

NO

YES

21.8
18.1

23.5
19.1

2.1'
2.3'

21 .o
17.9

25.1
19.5

5.2"
4.0"

22.1
18.3

25.4
18.8

1.5
1.1

22.3
18.1

24.5
22.3

1.4
5.2"

22.1
18.4

23.6
18.2

1.4
0.4

22.3
16.4

24.3
19.3

1.1
1.o

f

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

VIOLENCE AMONG HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS

ences in strength of personal power beliefs
( ~ 1 . 2 2df-410,
,
p . 2 0 ) but, not surprisingly, gender differences were found in the
strength of male role power beliefs, with
men holding these beliefs at a higher level
( ~ 9 . 9df-412,
,
p<.OOI).
However, girls also hold beliefs about
male dominance. A “male identified” girl
or woman would believe that boys and men
should be dominant. The median score on
the male sex role power measure was used
to classify high and low male power endorsement for girls. The difference in the
frequency of girls having used physical violence was significantly higher in the
group of girls who had high male role
power endorsement (F3.06, df-48, F . 0 1).
Belief in male dominance partially explains
the violence of both males and females in
this sample of high school students.
Finally, the expectation that those who
perpetrated violence would also be the victims of violence was tested. The hypothesis
was confirmed for severe physical violence
37.1, df-2, p<.OOOI), sexual violence
= 41$, df-2, p<.OOOl) and dating violence =23.8, df-2, p<.OOOI). Of the 145
students using severe physical violence,
52% had been the victim of physical violence in the same year (57% of the boy offenders and 46% of the girl offenders). For
26 sexual violence perpetrators, however,
19 (73%) had been the victim of sexual violence within the year (1 3 of 17 boys; 6 of
9 girls). Finally, of the 20 students who utilized dating violence, 10 (50%) had been
the victim of dating violence during the
academic year (6 of 10 boys; 5 of 10 girls).
Due to the limitations of the cross-sectional
design, this study was unable to identify
when perpetration preceded or followed
victimization.

more likely than girls to be both victim and
perpetrator of violence. In dating relationships, girls were more likely to be the victim of boys’ violence, and in all types of
relationships, girls were more likely to be
the victims of boy’s sexual violence. Whether the violence was between intimates or
nonintimates, sexual or physical, seven out
of ten cases of violence in this sample were
boy-to-girl. It should be noted that there
was a certain amount of girl-to-boy violence; however, most of the severe violence between teen intimates-punching,
kicking, beating, forcible sex, or rapewas perpetrated by boys upon girls. When
the focus is broadened to violence between
nonintimate peers, the offenders are still
mostly boys, although a larger number of
boys are reported to have been victims.
Consistent with the findings of other studies, girls reported nonsignificantly higher
rates of use of physical violence in dating
situations. Still, boys are less threatened by
all forms of violence than girls. In fact, violence probably means something different
to boys than to girls. Boys do not experience dating violence as particularly threatening, not only because of physical size
differences but also because violence appears normative for boys.
Due to the categorical nature of the relationship variable in this study, it was not
possible to determine whether boys who
were violent outside dating relationships
were also violent to girlfriends. In the study
of adult domestic violence, typologies have
been developed that classify men who batter either as violent only in their families or
violent both inside and outside of their
families (Gottman et al., 1995; Shields,
McCall, & Hanneke, 1988). Future research
might explore such typologies at the high
school level.
Endorsement of male power beliefs is reDISCUSSION
In contrast to some earlier studies, the lated to peer violence by both boys and
present investigation did not find that boys girls. Structural power, the type of power
and girls experience peer violence at an tapped by the HRS measure of male role
equal rate. When violence outside intimate power in this study, encourages and legitrelationships was examined, boys were imizes the use of violence through legal,

(x:=
(x

(x

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

BENNETT AND FINERAN

procedural, and ideological frameworks
(Archer, 1994).Males and females who endorse male dominance seem more likely to
use violence in their own lives, and violence may increase the strength of belief in
male role dominance. Conceptualizingviolence in terms of gender and power has
been important in dating and partner violence, but the current study suggests that
gender and power may be important factors
in a wider understanding of peer violence,
even between nonintimates.
This study has a number of weaknesses
that undermine the strength of the conclusions, particularly the nonprobability sample and the use of single-item measures of
violence. Due to the limitations of secondary data analysis, a number of variables
that would further elucidate peer violence
are not included in this research. Frequency of dating, violence in the family of
origin, drug and alcohol use, reasons for
using violence, and attitudes toward the acceptance of violence would optimally be
included in studies of interpersonal violence by high school students This study
measured whether severe violence occurred, and the frequency of that violence,
but did not measure the relative severity of
the violence. Thus, none of the violence elements measured can be considered nonsevere. Studies of adult domestic violence
have suggested that different levels of violence may have different explanatory factors (O’Leary, 1993).
The current research suggests that examinations of teen violence in which types of
violence are separated may misrepresent
their subject. A dating violence literature
that is distinct and separate from the community violence literature, research on teen
violence that does not acknowledge the
enormity of teen violence across relationships, or research on teen violence that fails
to examine the effects between types of violence may reinforce the “Balkanization”
of violence research (Gelles, 1994). In some
ways, the present study contributes to this
trend by omitting violence by and toward

651
anyone other than peers. Further research
should include both horizontal and vertical
links to broaden the description of violence
in the present and extend the experience of
violence across the life span, thus deepening our understanding of the role of violence in the lives of high school students.
REFERENCES
Archer, J. (1994). Power and male violence. In J.
Archer (Ed.), Male violence (pp. 310-331). London: Routledge.
Bennett, J. (1986). Power and influence as distinct
personality traits: Development and validation of
a psychometric measure. Journal of Research in
Personali& 22,361-394.
Bergman, L. (1992). Dating violence among high
school students. Social Work, 37,21-27.
Bookwala, J., Frieze, I.H., Smith, C., & Ryan, K.
(1992). Predictors of dating violence: A multivariate analysis. Violence & Victims, 7, 297-3 1 I .
Canterbury, R.J., Grossman, S.J., & Lloyd, E. (1993).
Drinking behaviors and lifetime incidence of date
rape among high school students upon entering
college. College Student Journal, 2 7 , 7 5 4 4 .
Davis, T.C., Peck, G O . , & Strorment, J.M. (1993).
Acquaintance rape and the high school student.
Journal of Adolescent Health, 14,220-224.
DeKeseredy, W.S., & Schwartz, M. (1994). Locating
a history of some Canadian woman abuse in elementary and high school dating relationships. Humaniv & Society. 18,4943.
Dutton, D.G. (1988). The domestic assault of women:
Psychological and criminal justice perspectives.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Dutton, D.G., & Browning, J.J. (1988). Concern for
power, fear of intimacy, and aversive stimuli for
wife assault. In G.T. Hotaling, D. Finkelhor, J.T.
Kilpatrick, & M.A. Straus (Eds.), Family abuse
and its consequences (pp. 163-175). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Fineran, S., & Bennett, L. (in press). Gender and
power issues of peer sexual harassment among
teenagers. Journal of Interpersonal Violence.
Gagne, M.H., & Lavoie, F. (1993). Young people’s
views on the cause of violence in adolescent relationships. Canada’s Mental Health, 41, 11-1 5.
Gelles, R.J. (1994). Common features of violence in
and out of the family. Paper presented at the National Conference on Family Violence Research
and Practice, University of Nebraska, Omaha.
Gottman, J.M., Jacobson, N.S., Rushe, R.H., Shortt,
J.W., Babcock, J., LaTaillade, J.J., & Waltz, J.
(1995). The relationship between heart rate reactivity and, emotionally aggressive behavior, and
general violence in batterers. Journal of Family
P ~ c h o l o g y9,227-248.
,
Hall, E.R., Howard, J.A., & Boezio, S.L. (1986). Tolerance of rape: A sexist antisocial attitude? Psychology of Women Quarterly, 10, 101-1 18.
Kurz, D. (1993). Physical assault by husbands: A major social problem. In R.J. Gelles & D.R. Loseke

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

VIOLENCE AMONG HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS
(Eds.), Current controversies on family violence
(pp. 88-103). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Lavoie, F., Hebert, M., & Dufort, F. (1995, July).
Predictive variables identifying dating violence
victims and aggressors among grade ten students.
Paper presented at Fourth International Family Violence Research Conference, University of New
Hampshire, Durham.
McClelland, D.C. (1975). Power; 7he inner experience. New York: Wiley.
Molidar, C.E. (1995). Gender differences of psychological abuse in high school dating relationships.
Child & Adolescent Social Work Journal, 12,
119-134.

O’Keefe, N.K., Brockopp, K., & Chew, E. (1986).
Teen dating violence. Social Work, 31, 465468.
O’Leary, K.D. (1993). Through a psychological lens:
Personality traits, personality disorders, and levels
of violence. In R.J. Gelles & D.R. Loseke (Eds.),
Current controversies on family violence (pp.
7-30). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Reuterman, N.A., & Burcky, W.D. (1989). Dating violence in high school: A profile of the victims.
Psychology: A Journal of Human Behavior, 26,
1-9.

Roscoe, B., & Callahan, J.E. (1985). Adolescents’

self-report of violence in families and dating relationships. Adolescence, 24 545-553.
Saunders, D.G.(1988). Wife abuse, husband abuse,
or mutual combat? In K. Yllo & M.Bograd (Eds.),
Feministperspectiveson wi$e abuse (pp. 90-1 13).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Shields, N.M., McCall, G.J., & Hanncke. C.R.
(1988). Patterns of family and nonfamily violence:
Violent husbands and violent men. Violence and
Victims, 3,83-97.
Straus, M.A. (1993). Physical abuse by wives: A major social problem. In R.J. Gelles & D.R. Loscke
(Eds.), Current Controversies on famiry violence
(pp. 67-87). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Sugarman, D.B., & Hotaling, G.T. (1989). Dating violence: Prevalence, context, and risk markers. In
M.A. PirogGood & J.E. Stets (Eds.)Violence in
dating relationships (pp. 3-32). New York:
Praeger.
Thompson, E.H. (1991). The maleness ofviolencc in
dating relationships: An appraisal of stereotypes.
Sex Roles, 24,261-268.
Vicary, J.R., Klingaman, L.R., & Karkncss, W.L.
(1995). Risk factors associated with date rapc and
sexual assault of adolesccnt girls. Journal of Adolescence, 18, 289-306.

