See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/226220663

The	Experience	of	Sexual	Harassment	Among
Grade-School	Students:	Early	Socialization	of
Female	Subordination?
Article		in		Sex	Roles	·	July	2000
DOI:	10.1023/A:1007007727370

CITATIONS

READS

80

551

2	authors:
Sarah	K	Murnen

Linda	Smolak

Kenyon	College

Kenyon	College

47	PUBLICATIONS			3,482	CITATIONS			

35	PUBLICATIONS			2,340	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:
Revision	of	the	Levine	&	Smolak	(2006)	book	entitled	"The	Prevention	of	Eating	Problems	and	Eating
Disorders:	Theory,	Research,	and	Practice"	(Mahwah,	NJ:	Erlbaum/Taylor	&	Francis)	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Sarah	K	Murnen	on	26	May	2014.

The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

The Experience of Sexual Harassment Among Grade-School Students: Early
Socialization of Female Subordination?
Date: 2000
Author: Sarah K. Murnen , Linda Smolak
Publisher: Sex Roles: A Journal of Research
The purpose of this study was to investigate elementary school children's interpretation of
sexual harassment incidents and the relationship of those interpretations to self-esteem
and body esteem. Eleven scenarios were read to 73 third- to fifth-grade children. Eight
scenarios exemplified peer harassment. The children were asked how they thought the
victim felt, what the victim should do, why the perpetrator did this, and whether
something similar had ever happened to them. They also completed gender role,
self-esteem, and body esteem scales. Results indicated that the majority of the children
had experienced peer harassment and that the boys and girls had experienced about equal
amounts. However, total harassment was negatively related to self-esteem in girls, but not
boys. Furthermore, the children's interpretations of the scenarios as well as the
relationship of these interpretations to body and self-esteem indicated that the meaning of
sexual harassment was different for the boys and girls. Girls were mo re likely to think
the victim would be frightened and boys more likely to think that the victim would be
flattered by the attention. Girls who reported that the victim would be frightened or that
they did not know how the victim would react reported lower body esteem. These data
are interpreted within the framework of sexual terrorism and sexual objectification
theories. These data also underscore the need for additional research in sexual harassment
among young children.
Previous research suggests high prevalence rates of sexual harassment among female
college students, with rates ranging from 30% to almost 50% (Benson & Thomson, 1982;
Lott, Reilly, & Howard, 1982; Roscoe, 1987; Wilson & Kraus, 1983). Rates of sexual
harassment reported by males were found to be lower, around 12-18%. Using a younger
sample, Roscoe, Strouse, and Goodwin (1994) asked 11- to-16 year-olds about sexual
comments, telephone calls, letters/notes, pressure for dates, physical contact, and sexual
advances. They found that 50% of the females, but only 37% of the males reported
experiencing sexual harassment. Furthermore, females reported being more upset by such
experiences. It also appeared that many of the reports of harassment experienced by
males were perpetrated by other males and so were not necessarily sexual harassment or
at least did not reflect gender status. Roscoe et al. (1994) concluded that girls' experience
of sexual harassment created an inhospitable learning environment, but that the bo ys'
experiences did not similarly interfere with their educational experience.
The widely cited AAUW study on sexual harassment reported even higher rates of sexual

harassment and again indicated that the experience of sexual harassment may be different
for boys and girls (Bryant, 1993). Of over 1600 students in grades 8-11, 76% of the boys
and 85% of the girls reported experiencing sexual harassment. Girls were more than twice
as likely as boys to be harassed by a teacher or school employee. Approximately 12% of
the boys who were harassed did not want to attend school and 13% reported that they
talked less in class because of the harassment. Because of the harassment, fully one third
of the harassed girls no longer wished to attend school, 32% reported that talking in class
was more difficult, and 20% said they had received a lower class grade. Girls also
reported altering their behavior to decrease the likelihood of harassment by avoiding
certain people or places and even giving up attendance at school events (Bryant, 1993).
Thus, sexual harassment affected girls' behavior more than it did that of boys, appearing
to teach girls to be fearful and to cope by avoiding the situation rather than by taking
direct action to stop the abuse (Bryant, 1993; Stein, 1993). Perhaps because of the sense
of relative powerlessness to stop the harassment, girls were much less likely than boys to
feel confident about themselves after episodes of sexual harassment (Bryant, 1993).
The participants in the AAUW study reported that harassment often began before middle
school. Indeed, 32% of the students said they had first been harassed in sixth grade or
earlier and 6% reported harassment before third grade (Bryant, 1993). These retrospective
reports demand additional research. In the present study we examined sexual harassment
by peers among elementary school children. Peers are the most common perpetrators of
sexual harassment in the school setting (Paludi, 1997). Our first hypothesis was that girls
would report slightly higher rates of sexual harassment than boys.
Definitions and measurement of sexual harassment have varied considerably across
studies. Many of the definitions that have been broadly applied in the workplace
harassment literature have limited applicability with elementary school children. They
focus on blatantly sexual comments and behaviors that are not likely to be common
among young children. Similarly, measures of sexual harassment that are commonly used
with adults, such as the Sexual Experiences Questionnaire (SEQ; Fitzgerald et al., 1988)
or the checklist used in the AAUW study, cannot be used with an elementary school
sample. For example, many of the checklists ask about sexual behaviors or comments
such as quid pro quo sexual bribery. The checklists also ask about sexualized behaviors,
e.g., grabbed you "in a sexual way." Such phrases are likely to be difficult for young
children to interpret. They require, for example, that children know the meaning of words
such as "sexual." It may be that neither the perpetrator nor the victim understands or can
express the sexual component of the behavior. Indeed, such limited comprehension even
affects attempts to interview children about child sexual abuse incidents (Steward et al.,
1997), which are likely less ambiguous than sexual harassment experiences.
Human-subjects review panels and parents may also have concerns about the
appropriateness of such questions for young children
In the present study, children were asked to respond to sexual harassment scenarios. Only
sexual harassment experiences that might be generally categorized as components of a
hostile environment (Fitzgerald, Swan, & Magley, 1997) were investigated. Quid pro quo
experiences were not considered. This choice was partially driven by the exigencies of

doing research in a public school setting. None of the included experiences involved
sexual coercion, the use of physical force, or explicitly sexual language. However, there
were examples of scenarios with sexual content (e.g., flipping up a girl's skirt).
Furthermore, all experiences were framed to be heterosocial, with the victim and
perpetrator being of different genders. This was done to make the sexual and gendered
nature of the harassment more salient to the children.
It is noteworthy that comparable scenarios were used to investigate the experiences of and
reactions to sexual harassment by both girls and boys. Research has indicated that the
experience of sexual harassment differs by gender among adolescents and adults
(Berdahl, Magley, & Waldo, 1996; Fitzgerald et al., 1997; Paludi, 1997). However, it is
unclear when this difference emerges. One aim of this investigation was to ascertain
whether elementary school-age boys and girls reacted differently to sexual harassment
situations.
Among adult women and adolescent girls, reactions to sexual harassment include fear and
a sense of helplessness (Bryant, 1993; Paludi, 1997; Roscoe et al., 1994). Indeed,
definitions of sexual harassment often require that the victims react with some form of
distress in order to consider the event harassment (as opposed, e.g., to flirting). Sheffield
(1993) has argued in her "sexual terrorism theory" that sexual violence against women
such as sexual harassment encourages girls to feel fearful. It was therefore hypothesized
that girls were more likely than boys to react with distress to the sexual harassment
situations.
Girls may be more distressed by sexual harassment than boys are because of the unequal
power afforded to each gender by traditional gender roles (Sheffield, 1993). Therefore, it
was hypothesized that endorsement of traditional gender roles would be related to
responses to sexual harassment such that more-feminine girls would exhibit more fear
and helplessness responses.
Objectification theory (Fredrickson & Roberts, 1997) argues that sexual harassment may
lead to heightened self-consciousness about one's body. Indeed, sexual harassment has
been linked to body image disturbance among adolescent girls and college women
(Larkin, Rice, & Russell, 1996; Piran, 1998; Weiner & Thompson, 1997). Such body
image problems, and perhaps more general self- and social esteem problems, seem
particularly likely when self-silencing, a form of helplessness, occurs in response to the
objectification and harassment (Smolak & Murnen, in press). Thus, we expected that
girls' understanding of appropriate responses to harassment would be related to body
esteem, social self-esteem, and global self-esteem. Such relationships were not expected
for boys since the adolescent and adult literature suggests that they do not tend to view
harassment by female peers as threatening or objectifying (Berdahl et al., 1996;
Fitzgerald et al., 1997; Paludi, 1997).
In sum, it was hypothesized that:
1. Girls would experience slightly higher rates of sexual harassment than boys.

2. Girls with more experience with sexual harassment would report a more negative body
image and perhaps a more negative general self-concept.
3. Girls would report more fear and helplessness in response to such situations than
would boys, with feminine girls in particular reporting more fear;
4. Girls who reported more fear and self-silencing victim responses to sexual harassment
will have lower body esteem, social self-esteem, and global self-esteem.
METHOD
Participants
Participants were 40 girls and 33 boys from grades three, four, and five at two public
elementary schools in rural Ohio. Their mean age was 10.44 years. Almost all of the
students were White. Given the somewhat sensitive nature of the project, permission was
obtained from the School Board as well as from the principals at the participating
schools. Active parental permission was required. Parents were sent a description of a
study about "childhood teasing" and asked to return the permission slip for their child if
they gave their consent. Fewer than half of the permission forms were returned. Children
whose parents consented were asked individually if they would like to participate. They
were told that nobody would find out their responses, that their names would not appear
on anything, and that they could stop participating at any time. All agreed to participate,
although a few did not respond to some of the scenarios.
Materials and Procedure
Children were taken out of their classrooms to be interviewed individually by either a
college undergraduate or one of the two female professors who are authors of the study.
Most of the college interviewers were women, although four boys were interviewed by a
college man. The interviewer first thanked the child for helping and said they would be
reading descriptions to the child and that "there is no right or wrong answer to any of
these questions--I just want to know how YOU feel. Any way you feel. . . is ok. . . ." The
interviewer then read a series of 11 scenarios. After each scenario, the children were
asked to respond to five questions. The child was then asked to respond to the gender
role, body esteem, self-esteem, and social esteem questions.
Sexual Harassment Measures
The scenarios featured something happening to a person of the same gender as the child.
Eight of the scenarios dealt with situations that could be construed as gender-related
harassment. (The other 3 were "filler" scenarios.) The choice of the sexual harassment
scenarios was guided by behaviors that the high school participants in Larkin's (1994)
study described. We used two examples of visual harassment (e.g., being stared at), three
examples of verbal harassment (e.g., receiving objectifying comments about what one is

wearing), and three examples of physical harassment (e.g., being pinched). In the
scenarios read to girls, a girl was the victim and a boy was the perpetrator. In the
scenarios read to boys, a boy was the victim and a girl was the perpetrator. This feature of
the scenarios highlighted the gendered nature of the events. See Appendix for a brief
description of the scenarios.
In response to each scenario, students were asked, "How do you think [the victim's name]
felt?"; "Why did [the perpetrator's name] do this?"; "What should [the victim's name]
do?"; "Has anything like this happened to you?"; and "If so, what did you do?" Students'
spontaneous responses to these questions were recorded by the interviewer.
Responses to the questions were categorized by two independent coders who were female
college undergraduates blind to the purposes of the study. When there was disagreement
between the two coders, a third female rater categorized the responses and the response
given by two out of three was chosen. If research participants gave more than one
response to a scenario, the first response was coded. Concerning the coding for "how the
victim felt," there was initial agreement between the two raters on 90% of the items
coded across the eight harassment scenarios. For responses to "why the perpetrator did
this," there was initial agreement on 77% of the items coded. For responses concerning
"what to do," initial agreement occurred on 84% of the items across the scenarios. Again,
when there was a disagreement, it was resolved by a third coder so that all codings were
based on a "majority vote."
In response to the "how the person felt", we examined all of the responses that occurred
and grouped them into nine categories: (1) sad, hurt, (2) embarrassed, self-conscious, bad,
uncomfortable, (3) weird, confused, strange, (4) nervous, scared, worried, (5) annoyed,
bothered, (6) angry, mad, upset, (7) positive, (8) don't know, and (9) other. Each category
was then summed across the eight harassment scenarios to yield total scores. So, for
example, there is a total score for "nervous, scared, worried" that could range from 0 to 8
and would indicate the number of times a person projected that someone would be scared
in response to a scenario. In this way, continuous measures of these projected feelings
were created to be used in analyses.
In response to "Why did [the person] do this?" a total of 11 categories were initially
identified, but were later more logically grouped into 5 categories: (1) the person did this
for some positive reason, or to be funny, (2) the person did this to bug, tease, or
embarrass (but not to be mean), (3) the person did this to be mean, show dislike, hurt the
person, or show disrespect based on their gender, (4) the perpetrator is a bad or
disagreeable person, and (5) the victim deserved the harassment. The number of times the
participant used each of these response options was summed across the eight scenarios, so
that each score could range from 0 to 8.
In response to "What should [the person] do?" the response options of interest to the
present study were: (1) nothing, ignore it, or forget it, (2) tell someone, and (3) do
something oneself to stop the situation. Again, responses were summed across the eight
scenarios to yield three scores that could range from 0 to 8.

In response to each of the eight harassment scenarios, we indicated whether something
similar had (score = 1) or had not (score = 0) happened to the individual. A total
harassment experiences score was calculated by summing up responses to "Has anything
like this happened to you?" across the eight scenarios so that scores could range from 0 to
8.
Finally, students' responses as to what they did if this had happened to them were coded
according to the categories described above for "What should [the person] do?"
In sum, the following scores were of interest for the feelings responses: number of times a
child reported projecting onto victims of harassment feelings of being "sad," humiliated
("bad"), "scared," "weird," annoyed or angry ("mad"), "bothered," or "positive," or
reported unsureness of how the victim would feel ("don't know"). For the "why"
responses, we examined how often they thought it was for a positive reason or to "be
funny," "tease," or "hurt" or be mean. In response to what should the person do, we
recorded the number of times the child advocated doing nothing ("ignore"), telling on the
person ("tell"), or doing something themselves ("do").
Gender Role Orientation
Gender role orientation was measured using the short form of the Children's Sex Role
Inventory (CSRI; Boldizar, 1991). The CSRI is based on the Bem Sex Role Inventory
(Bem, 1974), but has been validated for use with elementary school children. Separate
scores are calculated for femininity and masculinity. High femininity scores tend to
indicate a commitment to relationships, nurturance, and kindness. High masculinity
scores tend to indicate leadership, competitiveness, and assertiveness.
Body Esteem
The Body Esteem Scale (BES; Mendelson & White, 1985, 1993) has been designed for
use with elementary school children and has good internal consistency and test--retest
reliability. The total BES score indicates satisfaction with overall appearance, while a
subset of four items (here referred to as BESBOD) assesses body esteem specifically in
regard to weight and shape.
Self-Esteem
Two subscales of the Self-Perception Profile for Children (Harter, 1985) were used to
assess global self-esteem and social self-esteem. Each scale consists of six items rated by
the child to indicate overall sense of satisfaction with self and self-perceived social
acceptance by peers, respectively. Adequate internal consistency has been demonstrated
for each scale (Harter, 1985).
RESULTS

All reported p levels are two-tailed tests unless otherwise noted.
Total Harassment Experiences
The first hypothesis was that females would have slightly higher rates of experience with
sexual harassment than would males. Girls reported fewer episodes of sexual harassment,
M = 1.92, s = 1.77, than did boys, M = 2.36, s = 1.95, although this difference was not
statistically significant, t(71) = --1.00, ns.
Table I shows the percentage of females and males who reported each of the eight
examples of harassment. Among the females, at least 12% reported experiencing each of
the situations, with the most commonly experienced being having an entrance blocked
(36.59%) and being stared at (31.71%). Only 25% of the girls reported that none of the
episodes had ever happened to them. Among the males, the range of percentages of
experiencing each situation was from 5.71% (being pinched) to 38.89% (having an
entrance blocked), with 21% reporting no harassment experiences. If the "hot outfit"
scenario is eliminated, then 27% of the girls and 27% of the boys report no harassment.
Relative to girls, boys were more likely to report experiencing a "hot outfit" comment,
[[chi].sup.2](1) = 7.06, p [less than] .01, and to have girls giggle or whisper about them as
they walked by, [[chi]sup.2](1) = 4.19, p [less than] .05. There were no other gender
differences in the frequency of harassment experiences.
Additionally, it was hypothesized that amount of harassment experience would be
negatively correlated with body esteem, social esteem, and global self-esteem for girls,
but not for boys. For girls, there was a significant correlation between total harassment
and global self-esteem, r(36) = -.37, p [less than] .05; between total harassment and social
self-esteem, r(26) = -.31, p = .05; and between total harassment and the weight-shape
dimension of the body esteem scale (BESBOD), r(38) = -.35, p [less than] .05. These
negative associations indicate that the girls who experienced more harassment also
reported lower global self-esteem, social self-esteem, and satisfaction with weight and
shape. For boys, there were no significant correlations between the total harassment score
and these measures.
Victim Responses to Harassment
Hypothesis 3 concerned whether females and males would respond differently to the
harassment situations. Emotional responses were computed by summing up the number
of times across the eight scenarios that a person reported each emotion. The mean
responses are reported in Table II. Among the females, the most commonly reported
feeling was "bad," M = 2.95, s = 1.78, as it was among males, M = 2.57, s = 1.50. When
the mean number of responses within each feeling was compared, girls reported a higher
mean "scared" score, M = .70, s = .72, than did boys, M = .20, s = .47, t(73) 3.49, p =
.001. As these standard deviations indicate, there was a problem with the distribution of
the scared scores. Of the 40 girls, 17 never said that the victim would be frightened, 19
said this in response to one scenario, 3 in response to two, and 1 girl in response to three
scenarios. Among the 35 boys, only 6 ever said the victim would be scared and 4 of the 6

said it in response to just one scenario. Therefore, a dichotomous vari able of "ever"
answered "scared" versus never answered "scared" was created. Girls were significantly
more likely to have ever answered "scared" than were boys, [X.sup.2](1) = 12.82, p [less
than] .001. Indeed, 57.5% of the girls, but only 17% of the boys ever answered "scared."
Boys were more likely to report "positive" responses, [M.sub.boys] = .97, S = .62,
[M.sub.girls] = .25, s = .49, t(73) = 5.53, p [less than] .001. There were no significant
gender differences for reports of "sad," "bad," "weird," and "mad."
Boys' greater "positive" response was based mainly on their response to one of the
scenarios. Specifically, nearly 76% of the boys thought a girl saying "hot outfit dude" to a
boy would make the boy feel good or feel proud. Note that only 12% of the girls
perceived a boy saying "hot outfit babe" as "positive" for the girl receiving the comment,
and almost 10% reported the girl would be afraid.
It was also hypothesized that levels of femininity and masculinity would be related to
children's perceptions of the victims' responses to harassment scenarios. Only one
significant correlation emerged. Girls who more frequently responded that the victim
would feel "bad" had lower femininity scores, r(37) = - .44, p [less than] .01.
It was also hypothesized that girls' perceptions of victim responses would be related to
body and self-esteem. We attempted a 2 X 2 ANOVA to examine gender and scared
status (ever vs. never) effects on total body esteem score and BESBOD. However, only 4
of the boys who responded "scared" answered all of the body esteem questions.
Therefore, a t test was performed comparing the body and self-esteem scores of girls who
ever answered "scared" to those who never did. For BESBOD, no significant differences
emerged. For total body esteem scores, girls who ever responded "scared" reported lower
body esteem, M = 18.43, s = 5.69, than those who never responded "scared," M = 21.00, s
= 2.19, t(37) = -1.71, p [less than] .05, one-tailed. Note that there is substantial
heterogeneity of variance in this t test. The separate error variance estimate test also
shows a significant effect, t(30.34) = -1.96, p [less than] .05, one-tailed. These two groups
of girls did not differ from each other in terms of global or social sel f-esteem.
Other response scales could be treated as continuous. Girls who more frequently
answered "don't know" in answer to the question concerning the victims' feelings had
lower total body esteem scores, r(37) = -.46, p [less than].01 and lower BESBOD scores,
r(38) = -.32, p [less than] .05. These girls also had lower social self-esteem, r(36) = -.43, p
[less than] .01 and lower global self-esteem, r(36) = -.33, p [less than] .05. Girls who
responded with a comment other than those coded (i.e., "other") had lower BESBOD
scores, r(40) = -.40, p = .01 and lower social self-esteem scores, r(38) = -.35, p [less than]
.05. Among the boys, there was a trend for social self-esteem to be negatively related to
the frequency of responding "don't know," r(29) = .31, p [less than] .10. Global
self-esteem, total body esteem, and BESBOD were not significantly related to "don't
know" responses for boys.
Perpetrator's Intent and Best Response

There was only one significant gender difference in the children's perception of why the
perpetrator committed the harassment (see Table II). Girls were more likely than boys to
say that the perpetrator was trying to tease the person, M = 1.05, SD = .15 for girls; M =
.58, SD = .83 for boys; t(73) = 1.98, p [less than] .05. Girls who tended to say that the
perpetrator was trying to hurt the victim tended to be more feminine, r(37) = .45, p [less
than] .01, while boys who came to the same conclusion tended to be less feminine, r(31)
= -.38, p [less than] .05. Perpetrators' intent responses were not related to any of the
self-esteem measures for boy. Among the girls, those who held the victim responsible for
the episode had higher BESBOD scores, r(40) = .33, p [less than] .05.
There were also no gender differences in how the children thought the victim should
respond (see Table II). The preferred victim responses were not related to masculinity or
femininity. Girls who said the victim should say or do something directly to the
perpetrator had higher social self-esteem scores, r(31) = .41, p [less than] .05.
DISCUSSION
The general purpose of this research was to investigate whether elementary school
children experienced sexual harassment by their peers. We were particularly interested in
whether boys and girls had similar experiences and perceptions of peer sexual
harassment. Finally, the relationship of sexual harassment experiences and perceptions to
body esteem, social self-esteem, and global self-esteem were examined.
While sexual harassment was apparently not a common experience among the third
through fifth graders in this study, most had experienced some. Our methodology does
not allow us to estimate overall rates of sexual harassment among elementary school
children. However, this methodology was comprehensible to the children in ways that
existing questionnaires for adults and adolescents might not be. The vignettes provided
more experience-related information with less terminology than do most questionnaires.
They required no familiarity with the concept of sexual harassment. Because the vignettes
focused on fictitious children, they provided a context for asking the children about
sexual harassment that may have seemed less threatening and personal than a checklist.
Thus, the vignette methodology does appear to have successfully indicated that children
indeed experience peer sexual harassment and that there are individual differences in how
they interpret and react to those experiences.
Boys and girls did not seem to differ in the amount of harassment they reported. This may
be an artifact of our methodology. More specifically, the children were not asked whether
the perpetrator (in their own experience) was of the same or other gender. During the
interviews, boys sometimes made comments that seemed to indicate that they assumed
that the gender of the perpetrator was not relevant. In other words, teasing and
intimidation were not clearly gendered experiences for the boys despite our attempts to
emphasize the gendered nature of the vignettes. Girls seemed to understand the gendered
nature of the question; girls knew when we asked if this had happened to them that we
meant "has a boy done this to you?" Without systematic data, we cannot conclusively
argue that this misunderstanding on the part of the boys influenced the data. However,

previous research (e.g., Roscoe et al., 1994) supports this as a possibility. In future
research, children should always be asked what they understand about the gender of the
perpetrators. Future researchers might also keep in mind that same-gender sexual
harassment is possible.
Furthermore, the development of sexually harassing behaviors as well as of their
interpretation by victims and others is virtually uncharted. It may be that at this relatively
young age, children are just starting to understand the power relationships that are
seminal to sexual harassment. Given that boys are more often perpetrators and girls more
often victims of sexual harassment, ongoing gender role development and socialization
may provide boys and girls with different information about sexual harassment, leading
them to have different interpretations of such behavior. Future research needs more
closely to examine what children understand when asked about sexual harassment.
The idea that cross-gender sexual harassment means something different to elementary
school boys than to girls is underscored by the relationship of total sexual harassment to
self-esteem. Among the girls, total number of sexual harassment experiences was
negatively related to global, social, and body self-esteem. No such relationships emerge
for boys. That boys and girls might perceive and react differently to sexual harassment,
and that girls may be more severely affected, is consistent with findings with adolescents
and adults as well as with data concerning child sexual abuse (Berdahl et al., 1996;
Bryant, 1993; Kendall-Tackett, Williams, & Finkelhor, 1993).
As predicted by sexual terrorism theory (Sheffield, 1993), girls were more likely to
perceive sexual harassment as at least sometimes frightening. In fact, a majority of the
girls thought the victim would be scared in at least one scenario. Fewer than 20% of the
boys ever responded that the victim would be scared. It is noteworthy that none of the
vignettes included explicit verbal threats. Nor was physical harm part of any of the
scenarios. Yet the girls recognized the implicit message that the boys were more powerful
and might harm them. The possibility that even children this young recognize the gender
power differential is supported by research suggesting that preschool-age girls will seek
adult protection when boys are in the room (Maccoby, 1988). The development of
awareness of this power difference is an important area for future research.
Girls who perceived fear in response to the scenarios also tended to have lower body
esteem. This finding, which is consistent with objectification theory and previous
research with adolescents (Fredrickson & Roberts, 1997; Larkin, Rice, & Russell, 1999;
Piran, in press), must be interpreted cautiously. The effect was not large and there were
some statistical problems (regarding heterogeneity of variance) in the analysis. On the
other hand, one might only expect such effects to emerge after chronic exposure to and
experience with sexual harassment of self and others. Given the young age of these girls,
it is a bit surprising that such relationships are already evident. Again, this finding
emphasizes the importance of understanding the development of the awareness of
gendered power differences.
Similarly, the relatively strong relationship of "don't know" responses by the girls, but not

the boys, to body esteem and self-esteem is somewhat surprising. Objectification theory,
along with Gilligan's work (Brown & Gilligan, 1992; Taylor, Gilligan, & Sullivan, 1995),
suggests that as girls approach adolescence they may "self-silence". The core of silencing
is an inability to recognize how one might feel in a particular situation. Silenced girls will
characteristically respond "don't know" to interviewer questions (Taylor et al., 1995).
Such silencing is hypothesized to be related to body image and even to psychopathology
such as eating disorders and depression (Smolak & Murnen, in press). The relationships
of fear and silencing as emotional responses to sexual harassment deserve much more
research attention.
Overall, the data from this study do support the argument that peer harassment is
perceived differently by boys and girls. Boys are less likely to be frightened; they even
perceive some potential harassment episodes as positive. The girls rarely do. Unlike boys,
girls who experience higher levels of sexual harassment have lower global, social, and
body esteem. Girls who seem unsure how to respond emotionally have poorer body and
self-esteem. This is not true of boys. Gender role orientation relationships to the sexual
harassment variables also showed different patterns for boys and girls, though there were
not many such correlations.
This study was in many ways preliminary. The sample is limited in its generalizability.
The vignette measure probably underestimates rates of sexual harassment since it does
not provide all possible instances of harassment, even among peers. The likelihood of an
underestimate is increased by the tendency of children of this age to be concrete in their
thinking; hence, they may not fully generalize the scenarios to similar situations. On the
other hand, our failure to ask about the gender component of the scenarios may have
affected the rates of reported harassment among the boys. Furthermore, the order in
which the measures were given may have affected some of the data.
The children participating in this study were almost all White and were from a rural
community. It is not clear how these results might generalize to a multiethnic or ethnic
minority school setting. Research suggests that girls from ethnic minority groups who are
in a mixed-ethnicity school setting may be more likely to be harassed, partially because
of myths about ethnic sexuality (Larkin, 1994; Smolak & Striegel-Moore, in press).
Likelihood of and reactions to sexual harassment within a more ethnically homogeneous
community remain unexplored among African American, Latina, or Asian American
students.
Finally, this is a correlational study. It is possible that poor esteem affects responses to
harassment rather than the reverse. It is even more likely that self-esteem and sexual
harassment operate in a cyclical fashion. Only longitudinal research can address this issue
thoroughly. The present study does, however, clearly indicate the value of pursuing such
questions, beginning in elementary school.
(1.) To whom correspondence should be addressed at Department of Psychology, Kenyon
College, Gambier, Ohio 43022; e-mail: murnen@kenyon.edu.

REFERENCES
Bern, S. (1974). The measurement of psychological androgyny. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 42, 155-162.
Benson, D. J., & Thomson, G. E. (1982). Sexual harassment on a university campus: The
confluence of authority relations, sexual interest, and gender stratification. Social
Problems, 29, 236--251.
Berdahl, J., Magley, V., & Waldo, C. (1996). The sexual harassment of men? Exploring
the concept with theory and data. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 20, 527--547.
Boldizar, J. (1991). Assessing sex typing and adrogyny in children. Developmental
Psychology, 27, 505--515.
Brown, L., & Gilligan, C. (1992). Meeting at the crossroads. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Bryant, A. (1993). Hostile hallways: The AAUW survey on sexual harassment in
America's school. Journal of School Health, 63, 355--357.
Fitzgerald, L., Shullman, S., Bailey, N., Richards, M., Swecker, J., Gold, Y., Ormerod,
M., & Weitzman, L. (1988). The incidence and dimensions of sexual harassment in
academia and the workplace. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 42, 152--175.
Fitzgerald, L., Swan, S., & Magley, V. (1997). But was it really sexual harassment?
Legal, behavioral, and psychological definitions of the workplace victimization of
women. In W. O'Donohue (Eds.), Sexual harassment: Theory research and treatment (pp.
5-28). Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Frederickson, B., & Roberts, T. (1997). Objectification theory: Toward understanding
women's lived experiences and mental health risks. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 21,
173--206.
Harter, S. (1985). Manual for the Self-Perception Profile for Children. Denver, CO:
University of Denver.
Kendall-Tackett, K., Williams, L., & Finkelhor, D. (1993). Impact of sexual abuse on
children: A review and synthesis of recent empirical studies. Psychological Bulletin, 113,
164--180.
Larkin, J. (1994). Sexual harassment: High school girls speak out. Toronto, Canada:
Second Story Press.
Larkin, J., Rice, C., & Russell, V. (1996). Slipping through the crack: Sexual harassment,
eating problems, and the problem of embodiment. Eating Disorders: The Journal of

Treatment and Prevention, 4, 5-26.
Larkin, J., Rice, C., & Russell, V. (1999). Sexual harassment and the prevention of eating
disorders: Educating young women. In N. Piran, M. P. Levine, & C. Steiner-Adair (Eds.),
Preventing eating disorders: A handbook of interventions and special challenges (pp.
194-207). Philadelphia: Brunner/Mazel.
Lott, B., Reilly, M. E., & Howard, D. R. (1982). Sexual assault and harassment: A
campus community case study. Signs, 8, 296--319.
Maccoby, E. (1988). Gender as a social category. Developmental Psychology, 24,
755--765.
Mendelson, B., & White, D. (1985). Development of self-body-esteem in overweight
children. Developmental Psychology, 21, 90--96.
Mendelson, B., & White, D. (1993). Manual for the Body-Esteem Scale--Children.
[Available from Donna White, Concordia University, Center for Research in Human
Development, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H4B 1R6.]
Paludi, M. (1997). Sexual harassment in schools, In W. O'Donohue (Eds.), Sexual
harassment: Theory research and treatment (pp. 225--249). Boston, MA: Allyn and
Bacon.
Piran, N. (1998). A participatory approach to the prevention of eating disorders in a
school. In W. Vandereycken & G. Noordenbos (Eds.), The prevention of eating disorders
(pp. 173--186). London: Athlone.
Piran, N. (in press). Eating disorders: A trial of prevention in a high risk school setting.
Journal of Primary Prevention.
Roscoe, B. (1987). Concerns of college students: A report of self-disclosures. College
Student Journal, 21, 158--161.
Roscoe, B., Strouse, J., & Goodwin, M. (1994). Sexual harassment: Early adolescents'
self-reports of experiences and acceptance. Adolescence, 29, 515--523.
Sheffield, C. J. (1993). The invisible intruder: Women's experiences of obscene phone
calls. In P. B. Bart & E. G. Moran (Eds.), Violence against women: The bloody footprints
(pp. 73-78). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Smolak, L., & Murnen, S. K. (in press). Gender and eating problems. In R.
Striegel-Moore &
L. Smolak (Eds.), Eating disorders: New directions for research and practice.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Smolak, L., & Striegel-Moore, R. H. (in press). Challenging the myth of the golden girl:
Ethnicity and eating disorders. In R. Striegel-Moore & L. Smolak (Eds.), Eating
disorders: New directions for research and practice. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Stein, N. (1993, August). Secrets in full view: Sexual harassment in our K-12 schools.
Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Psychological Association, Toronto,
Canada.
Steward, M., Steward, D., Farquhar, L., Myers, J. E. B., Reinhart, M., Welker, J., Joye,
N., Driskill, J., & Morgan, J. (1997). Interviewing young children about body touch and
handling. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers for the Society for Research in Child
Development.
Taylor, J., Gilligan, C., & Sullivan, A. (1995). Between voice and silence: Women and
girls, race and relationship. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Weiner, K., & Thompson, J. K. (1997). Overt and covert sexual abuse: Relationship to
body image and eating disturbance. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 22,
273-285.
Wilson, K. R., & Kraus, L. A. (1983). Sexual harassment in the university. Journal of
College Student Personnel, 24, 219-224.
APPENDIX
The scenarios are listed in order below. The example given is for female participants, and
the names in parentheses represent the names given to male participants (pronouns were
changed as well).
[1] Samantha (Sam) was in the lunchroom. At another table was a boy (girl) who kept
staring at her. When she looked at him he would not look away. (VISUAL)
[2] Joey (Beth) ran up to Beth (Joey) and flipped up her skirt (pulled down his pants)
(PHYSICAL)
[3] Jackie (Jack) went to her locker at lunchtime and found a sign that said "ugly" with a
drawing of a pig labeled "Jackie" ("Jack"). (NOT USED IN ANALYSIS, NOT
SPECIFICALLY GENDER RELATED)
[4] Tina (Conner) got a good score on her math test. Her friend Conner (Tina) said, "nice
job, Tina. (Conner)" (POSITIVE EXAMPLE--NOT USED IN ANALYSES)
[5] Amanda (Adam) was getting off the bus when a boy she knew looked her (him) up
and down and said, "hot outfit, babe (dude)." (VERBAL)

[6] Lindsey (Larry) was walking back to class after lunch. Billy (Rachel) and Timmy
(Tammy) stopped her by standing in front of her. When she tried to get around, they
wouldn't let her. (PHYSICAL)
[7] Meghan (Michael) was trying to carry a bunch of books to her desk. She dropped two
of them. Michael (Meghan) picked up the books and carried them to Meghan's
(Michael's) desk for her. (POSITIVE EXAMPLE--NOT USED IN ANALYSES)
[8] Jill (Corey) walked to the teacher's desk. She heard three boys whispering, giggling,
and watching her while she walked. (VERBAL)
[9] Kaitlin (Tyler) asked Jason and Sam (Linda and Sarah) if she could play football
(jumprope). Sam said, "No--girls aren't good at football" and Jason said, "Yeah, and they
cry all the time, too." (Sarah said, "No--boys aren't any good at jump rope," and Linda
said, "Yeah, and they shout all the time, too.") (VERBAL)
[10] As Hannah (Ben) got off the bus, Eric (Ellen) reached over and pinched her bottom.
(PHYSICAL)
[11] Amy (Andrew) kept getting phone calls from a boy who said he thought she was
cute. She asked him to stop calling, but he didn't. (VERBAL)

View publication stats

