American Educational Research Association

The Culture of Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools
Author(s): Valerie E. Lee, Robert G. Croninger, Eleanor Linn, Xianglei Chen
Source: American Educational Research Journal, Vol. 33, No. 2 (Summer, 1996), pp. 383-417
Published by: American Educational Research Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1163290
Accessed: 05/03/2009 12:53
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aera.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

American Educational Research Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to American Educational Research Journal.

http://www.jstor.org

AmericanEducationalResearchJournal
Summer1996, Vol.33, No. 2, pp. 383-417

The Culture of Sexual Harassment in
Secondary Schools
Valerie E. Lee
Robert G. Croninger
EleanorLinn
Xianglei Chen
University of Michigan
"This
study investigatesthefrequency, severity,and consequencesof sexual
harassmentin Americansecondaryschools,using 1993 surveydatafrom a
nationally representativesample of 1,203 8th to 11th gradersin 79public
schools.Wefoundthat83%ofgirlsand 60%of boysreceiveunwantedsexual
attention in school. Exceptfor gender, social backgroundis unrelated to
eithertheprobabilityor the severityof sexual harassment.However,factors
characterizingthe contextof harassmentare stronglyassociatedwith both
occurrenceand severity:the harassmentexperiencesoffriends,perceptions
of the school environmentfor harassment,and whetherthe student has
himself/herselfharassed others. Our resultsled us to question the simple
model,as overhalf of thesestudentsreportedbothharassperpetrator-victim
ing and being harassedby theirclassmates.Consideringthe many theories
posed to explainsexual harassment,we recommenda culturallybasedtheory
as .mostconsistentwith our resultsand mosthelpfulfor schoolsin designing
appropriateresponses.Weprovideseveralpolicy recommendations
for secondary schools to addressthis importantand widespreadphenomenon.
VALERIE
E. LEEis an Associate Professor in the School of Education, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. Her specializations are sociology of education,
quantitative methods in social science research, and educational policy.

ROBERT
G. CRONINGER
is a PhD Candidate in Educational Studies, School of
Education, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. His specializations are
sociology of education, quantitative methods, and educational equity.
ELEANOR
LINNis a Senior Associate Director in the Programs for Educational
Opportunity, School of Education, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. Her
specializations are sexual harassment in schools, equity in mathematics and science,
and parent involvement in education.
XIANGLEI
CHENis a Research Associate with MPRAssociates, Berkeley, CA. Her
specializations are educational equity, minority and immigrant education, and
quantitative research methods.

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

The

AmericanAssociationof UniversityWomen (AAUW)1993 report
about the prevalence of sexual harassmentin our nation'ssecondary
schools provoked much public controversy."Wasthis problem really as
prevalentin schools as the AAUWclaimed?""Whyhad this issue generated
so little public attentionbefore?""Weren'tmost incidents pretty minor?"
"Wasn'tthis just normal adolescent behavior under a new name?""Was
callingattentionto this issue justanotherfeministploy to gain attentionfor
the unmet needs of girls?""Wasit a coalitionof feministsand reactionaries
advocatingfor repressionof expression?"Tryingto understandthe startling
pictureof adolescentbehaviorpresentedin the AAUWreport,commentators
faulted the survey's definition of sexual harassment'or its methods of
analysis.Otherschose to explicateit with anecdotalinformation.This study
represents an effort to expand and illuminatethe results of the AAUW
survey. Because school-based sexual harassmenthas received so little
serious empiricalscrutiny,we begin by reviewingthe historicaland theoreticalcontexts in which sexual harassmentin schools is embedded.
Background
The Historical Context
In the workplace. Although the verb to harass came into English centuries
ago from Old High German and Old French, the term sexual harassment did
not enter the lexicon until the 1970s, when feminist activists sought a way
to address the unwanted sexual attention that women faced in the workforce.
From the beginning, the concept included a wide range of offensive
behaviors-from sexual innuendo to rape-that women said impeded their
job performance and made them vulnerable to retaliation. The U. S. Equal
Employment Opportunities Commission (EEOC) developed a legal definition of sexual harassment in 1980 that elaborated two main types: (1) the
more coercive quid pro quo (i.e., pressure for sexual favors as a condition
of employment) and (2) the more common hostile environment, which
could be verbal or physical in nature. Defined as a form of sex discrimina-

tion, sexual harassmentwas thereforeillegal.
In schools.Even before the EEOCdefinitionbecame law, Yale University studentsfiled an unsuccessfulsexual harassmentsuit underTitle IX of
the EducationAmendmentsof 1972, which prohibitssex discriminationin
education.The initialfocus in institutionsof higher educationwas on the
behaviorof school employees toward students(Alexanderv. Yale, 1980),
but subsequentattentionhas expanded the focus to include studentinteractions (Jaschik,1991) and the harassmentof faculty (Dey, Sax, Kom, &
Ramirez,1996). Research on the prevalence, nature, and psychological
consequencesof sexualharassmentof universitystudentshas expandedour
understandingof such issues in educationalsettings(Brodky& Fine, 1992;
Hall & Sandler,1982, 1988; Paludi, 1990; Paludi & Barickman,1991;Till,
1980).
384

Sexual Harassmentin SecondarySchools
Concernover sexual harassmentin elementaryand secondaryschools
followed, beginning with Title IX and the opening of traditionallymale
programsin vocationalhigh schools to females.Althoughsexual harassment
was not mentionedin the originalguidelinesfor complianceand implementation of Title IX (McCune& Matthews,1976), high school girls registered
numerouscomplaintsof harassmentwith national,state, and local officials
(Linn,Stein,Young, & Davis (1992).
Estimatingthe scope of harassmentin schools. Earlysurveysprovided
limited informationabout the incidence and nature of high-school-based
sexual harassment,although their nonscientificsamples allowed no estimates of prevalence.A Massachusettssurvey reportedthat: (a) students'
harassmentby peers was more common than by teachers,(b) girls were
much more likely than boys to be harassed,especiallyso for more severe
formsof unwantedphysicalattention;(c) sexualharassmentwas as common
in comprehensivehigh schools as in vocational schools; and (d) sexual
harassmentwas as common in fully co-educationalschools as in schools
enrolling low proportions of female students (Stein, 1981). In another
survey, a majorityof female high school juniorsand seniors reportedthat
they had been sexually harassedin school (Strauss,1988).
Two recentsurveys,designedand supportedby advocacygroups,were
aimed at garneringnew public attentionand sympathyfor the not-so-new
problem in U. S. high schools: (a) the NationalOrganizationof Women
(NOW)LegalDefense and EducationFundand the WellesleyCollegeCenter
for Researchon Women developed a questionnairepublishedin Seventeen
andanalyzedby Stein,Marshall,
Magazine("What's
Happeningto You?"1992)
and Tropp (1993), and (b) the AAUWdeveloped a survey and published
resultsin HostileHallways(AAUW,1993).Fourfindingsemergedfromthese
more scientificallyvalid estimates:(1) sexual harassmentis very pervasive
in secondaryschools; (2) studentsconsidersexual harassmentunwelcome
and problematic;(3) the behavioroccurs in public places, and (4) students
have difficultyreceiving help, even though a majorityin both surveys
reportedtryingto talk to someone about the harassingbehavior.Resultsof
each surveywere releasedat press conferencesand promotedwith briefing
materials,poignant stories from young women, and television talk-show
appearances.Nonetheless,the magnitudeand seriousnessof sexual harassment reported by the surveys were challenged by some educators and
policymakers.
The public debate and politicalscrutinyengendered by these studies
surely represent progress. Public attention to the issue (and gendered
responsesto it) intensifiedwith AnitaHill's1992testimonybeforethe Senate
JudiciaryCommittee'shearings on the confirmationof Supreme-Courtnominee ClarenceThomas(Morrison,1992).In the wake of the hearings,the
public began to ask such questionsas, "Whywas welcomeness partof the
definition?""Whatharmdoes sexual harassmentactuallycause?""Ifsexual
harassmentis so common, why don't more people complain?""Does the
385

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

hostileenvironmentprovisionbelong in a good definition?"
These issues are
as relevant in schools as in workplaces, and, in schools (as well as
workplaces), sexual harassmentis receiving more serious recognitionby
parentsand educators(Stein & Sjostrom,1994).
Theoretical Explanations for Sexual Harassment
Underlying much of the discussion of sexual harassment (its causes and
appropriate responses to it) are five main theoretical formulations: biological, developmental, pathological, abuse of power, and cultural. Tangri, Burt,
and Johnson (1982) posited three formulations-the biological and two
forms of abuse of power. Our discussion of theory expands on the Tangri
et al. (1982) work. We begin with theories we find less helpful and advance
to those that offer more theoretical support for our empirical work.
Biological theory. This theory is based on physical differences between
the sexes. Hormonal and body size differences make males more aggressive
than females. This formulation assumes males as perpetrators, and females
as victims, of sexual harassment. Though males should be taught selfcontrol, lapses must be taken in stride: "Boys will be boys." Through this
lens, the best preventative measures would be protection, and often confinement, of females. Although punishing male perpetrators might be useful to
society (as a deterrent), it would be rather ineffective in changing the
behavior of individuals. Counter-indicatorsof this theory are actual instances
of females sexually harassing males, a seeming increase in the rate of sexual
harassment over time, and the influence of expectations on "proper"male
and female behavior (i.e., behaviors are not immutable).
Developmental theory. This conceptualization assumes that people learn
to communicate feelings through social interactions. Young people have
special difficulty communicating strong positive and negative feelings related to sexual attraction. Inability to express such feelings in socially
appropriate ways leads to (wittingly or unwittingly) engaging in harassing
behaviors. As adolescent girls are more socially skilled than boys, they
engage in fewer harassing behaviors. As young people mature, such
behaviors diminish, though some never learn "proper" sexual behavior.
Advocates of this theory point to some success for programs that build selfawareness, empathy, and communication skills (Beauvais, 1986). Counterindicators include the prevalence of harassment in the adult workforce
(Collins & Blodgett, 1981; Klein Associates, 1988; Sandroff, 1992; U. S. Merit
Systems Protection Board, 1981, 1987), its originalidentificationas a workforce
problem, and the fact that some people who appear to be quite well
socialized (i.e., a U. S. Senator, a Supreme CourtJustice) have been publicly
accused of harassing behaviors.
Pathology theory. Sexual harassment is a severely antisocial form of
behavior-in the pathological view, much like sexual abuse and domestic
violence. Trauma created by being victimized causes individuals to lose the
ability to empathize, and they find themselves perpetrating similar hurtful
386

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools

behaviorson others.Grouptherapyand sublimationthroughsocial activism
would be seen as the most promisingformsof rehabilitation.But change is
costly and time consuming.The prevalenceof sexual harassmentcounterindicatesthis theory, except in the case of extremeperpetrators.Although
this formulationis not uncommonin the generalpopulation,it is not taken
seriously by either cliniciansor researchers.The AmericanPsychological
Associationdoes not classifysexual harassmentas a mental disorder.
Abuseofpowertheories.Givenmore credibilityin the researchliterature
is the largertheoreticalcontext of abuse of power in which sexual harassment may be embedded.The threedifferentconceptualizationswe describe
share a common view of sexual harassment:a mechanismby which males
gain dominanceover females. Underthe firstview, sexual harassmentis a
formof exclusionaryintimidation,whereinpeople who usuallytreatothers
with kindness may resortto harassmentwhen changingconditionspose a
threatto theirsocietalprivilege.A perpetrator's
motivation,consciousor not,
is to intimidatevictimsinto givingup a newly acquiredpositionof privilege.
Just as lynchingserved to intimidateAfricanAmericansfromclaimingtheir
rights,underthis theory,sexual harassmentwould serveto keep women "in
their place."Perpetratorsare encouragedto realizethat the workforcehas
changed and thatgender roles are differentfromwhat they were a generation ago. Counteringthis formulationis the fact thatsexual harassmenthas
not subsided in schools and workplaces after many years of improved
gender integration.
Abuseof organizationalpower is a second conceptualizationof sexual
harassmentunderthe abuse of power theory.Here, individualsare seen as
having differingamounts of power in organizations,depending on roles.
Supervisorshave power over employees, principalsover teachers,teachers
over students. Because males typically occupy higher authorityroles in
organizations,they are in positions to abuse that authority.Femalebosses
could be equallyprone to such abuse underthis conceptualization(Kanter,
1977). This theory holds that those in power must be made aware of the
responsibilitiesaccompanyingtheir power and of the separationbetween
private and professional roles. This formulationwould not explain the
prevalenceof peer harassmentin schools.
The privilegingof males over females in the society undergirdsa third
subtheory,abuse of societalpower, where societal male dominancewould
be the key determinantin sexuallyharassingbehaviors.Proponentsof this
theory point to the sexual harassmentof female doctors by male patients,
adultfemale teachersby adolescentmale students,middle-classwomen on
the streetby male constructionworkers,and Whitefemalestudentsby male
studentsof color as examplesof the primacyof the gender hierarchyin the
relationshipof the sexes (e.g., MacKinnon,1979; 1993). A recent study of
women universityfacultysupportsthe societalpower abuse theory(Dey et
al., 1996). For proponents,nothingshort of the total reformof society will
help alleviate the problem. Undercuttingthis theoreticalexplanationare
387

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

modest but visible successes in reducing the climate of harassmentin
organizations(at least, over relativelyshort periods of time), as well as
differencesamong subculturesin their sexually harassingbehaviors.
Culturaltheories.Comparedto the theories describedabove, a more
fruitful constellation of explanations may be characterizedas culturally
related theories of sexual harassment.These theories deserve a fuller
exposition than we provide here. Besides differingfrom one another,they
overlapwith the theories alreadydiscussed.Moreover,they appear in the
literatureintermingledwith theoreticalexplanationsof human interactions
other thansexual harassment.The commonthreadsharedby these theories
is a focus on the culture immediatelysurroundingincidents of sexual
harassment (in our case, the school), rather than centering on either
individualsor the largersociety.2We offerbriefexplanationsof fourseparate
cultural theories, each implying a different organizationalresponse to
harassment.Whilethe sourceswe cite here provedhelpfulin stimulatingour
thinking,the conceptualizationof these theories as they relate to sexual
harassmentin schools is largely our own. We draw on psychological,
sociological, and.feministtheory.
In a Freudianculturalapproach,the existence of sexual harassmentis
seen as a failure of the culture to repress or functionallysublimatethe
potentially destructive forces of Eros and Thanatos in individuals. As
controlling these forces constitutes the very purpose of society, sexual
harassmentis a sign of social breakdownand a majorthreatto the social
order.Vociferousdenial of its existence, althoughpotentiallyineffectivein
stopping sexual harassment,is an understandable(and common) response
to it. This theory may explain why so many well-intendedpeople call for
furtherrepressionof adolescentsexual and aggressiveactivity(i.e., "Justsay
no!"or "Showgood manners!").
Anotherresponseby proponentsis to invent
new customs and rituals that help males and females sublimate these
destructivedrives (Freud,1949a, 1949b;Marcuse,1955).
Anotherculturaltheory to explain the phenomenon of sexual harassment in schools, the structuralapproach,centerson school normsconcerning sexuality and aggression.These culturaltheoristsadvocate structural
change as a way of influencingthe behaviorof individuals(Bidwell, 1965;
Deal, 1982).Proponentsmay directattentionto overt and formalprograms,
such as the school's disciplinecode (e.g., Gittens,1993;U.S.Departmentof
Education,1981).The same theorywould also have proponentslooking at
less overtstructuralfeaturesof schools--the mannerin which complaintsare
actuallyhandled,toleranceof rituals,heroes, and informalbehaviors--that
contradictthe organization's
formaldisapprovalof sexualharassment(Larson,
1983;Linn,1991;Myers,1987/1992).Opponentsof the structuralapproach
would consider such responses superficialand insufficientfor changing
complex patternsof values and belief in individuals.
A critical theory approachis closely related to the societal abuse of
power theory,except that a criticaltheoryapproachfocuses on the culture
388

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools

of schools. Both theoriessituatesexual harassmentwithin the violence and
sexual aggression in the larger society, particularlyas manipulatedby
advertisingand capitalistconsumption.Proponentswould see perpetuation
of social oppression throughlegitimizedforms of aggressionas a hidden
agenda of socializationin schools. Sexual harassment,according to this
formulation,is an expressionof studentand staffalienation,caused by the
violence done to them in an oppressive environment.
the best
Barringthe possibilityof a substantialculturaltransformation,
schools can do is to provide a more humane environmentwhere issues of
oppressionwould be open for discussion,studentswould be more involved
in setting the school's agenda, and decisions would relatemore closely to
the real lives of studentsand staff(Apple, 1982;Aronowitz& Giroux,1991;
McLaren,1994;Wexler,1987).Uncoveringthe silence thatsurroundssexual
harassmentis a crucialfirststep (Arnot& Weiner, 1987;Rich, 1979;Weiss
& Fine, 1993). Detractorseither disagree with the basic premise of this
formulation,or they see schools' hidden agenda as almost impossible to
change (in that schools reflectthe largersociety they serve).
An ethicalviewof culturedrawsheavilyon the notionthatorganizations
like schools derivemuch of theirlegitimacyfromlong-termethicalor moral
bonds thatbindtheirmembers(Bryk,1988;Cusick&Wheeler,1988;Dewey,
1966; Goodlad, 1984; Grant,1988; Gutmann,1987; Lightfoot,1983; Sizer,
1984, 1992). Recent research has documented the importanceof shared
values in the abilityof secondaryschools to functionas communities(Bryk
& Driscoll, 1988; Bryk, Lee, & Holland, 1993; Coleman& Hoffer, 1987).
Communalorganizationhas been empiricallylinkedwith positiveoutcomes
for students and teachers, in the form of commitment(of teachers) and
engagement (of students).This organizationalform is facilitatedby small
school size and is a move away from the bureaucraticformwhich characterizes the moderncomprehensivehigh school (Lee, Bryk,& Smith,1993).
Those who supporta culturaltheoryorganizedaroundethicalor moral
concerns would see sexual harassmentas a sign of the failureof existing
organizationsto instillethicalcoherenceand integrityin theirmembers.One
remedy,under this view, would rest in the organization'sincreasingattention to its ethical mission and to the interconnectednessof members by
overtlyaddressingissues of moraland ethicalbehaviorin schools. Although
detractorssee this view as encroachingon the rightsof parentsto define
their children'svalues and carryout their moral upbringing,proponents
would counterthattheirview of the basictenets of educationfor democracy
arereflectedin these ideas(Coleman&Hoffer,1987;Dewey, 1966;Gutmann,
1987; Lightfoot,1983). The debate about the proper role of ethics and
moralityin the school curriculum,which restson two ratherdifferentviews
of democracy,has a long and distinguishedhistory.3
ResearchQuestions
We locate our studyof sexualharassmentin schoolswithinthe historicaland
389

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

theoreticalgroundingsjust described.Beyond descriptiveinformation,little
researchattentionon this topic has heretoforebeen focused on secondary
schools, the locus of our investigation.Emergingdefinitionsof harassment
are increasinglytakingvictims'attitudesinto account.In this spirit,we use
students'own judgmentsto operationalizethe constructof sexual harassment-through their own reportsof multipleschool-basedexperiences of
sexual attention(verbaland physical)that they characterizedas unwanted
and/or upsetting.
Two differencesdistinguishourstudyfromextantresearchon thistopic.
First,thoughvirtuallyall researchon this topic is descriptive,our studyuses
a multivariateapproachwithin a causal modeling framework.Second, we
have attemptedto locate ourwork withina theoreticalcontextthatprovides
a sociological or culturalorientation.This context differssharplyfrom the
focus on individualsthathas providedotherharassmentstudieswith a more
psychologicalcharacter.The empiricalevidence we present,togetherwith
the theoryin which it is embedded,has importantimplicationsfor how we
think our society should address the problem of sexual harassmentin
schools. Empirically,we use a social context approach to identify and
quantifythe unique associationsof students'demographiccharacteristics
and the culture of their school-based associations with the incidence,
severity,and consequences of sexual harassment.To accomplishthis task,
we organizedour study aroundthree researchquestions:
* Question1:Incidenceofharassment.Who is harassed?Herewe identify
the demographiccharacteristicsof students and features of their school
social context that are associatedwith having experienced sexual harassment in a school setting.
* Question2: Severityof harassment.Forthose adolescentswho reported
having been sexually harassed,which demographicand contextualfactors
differentiatethe severityof the harassment?
We define severityin termsof
the reported frequency of the harassmentexperience and how troubled
studentswere by its occurrence(s).
* Question3: Consequencesof harassment.For students who reported
having been harassed,are there some undesirableoutcomes which result
fromthat experience?We consideredseveraltypes of consequenceswhich
mightinterferewith students'school progress-academic problems,psychological problems,and avoidancebehaviors.

Method
Sample and Data
AAUWsample. We drew the data for this study from a recent national survey
on sexual harassment experienced by U. S. students in public secondary
schools. The purposes of the survey, conducted by the AAUW Educational
Foundation in 1993, were to provide a profile of the problem of sexual
harassment in U. S. schools and to assess the impact of sexual harassment
390

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools

on young people in school. LouisHarrisand Associateswere commissioned
to select the sample, design the survey instrument,and collect the data.
Following a stratifiedtwo-stage sampling structure,a sample of public
secondaryschools acrossthe nationwas randomlyselected,and then,within
each sampled school, all studentswithin a single randomlyselected class
were surveyed. This procedure resulted in a sample of 1,632 surveyed
students in Grades 8 through 11, attending79 public schools across the
U. S. Within-schoolsample sizes were quite variable,but they averaged21
students.Due to the stratifiedsamplingstructure,the surveyprovidesdesign
weights for students. Thus, the findings based on this sample may be
generalizedto U. S. public school studentsin Grades8 through 11.4
Focusing on harassmentin a school setting, the AAUWsurvey items
restrictedthe requested informationto school-relatedharassmentduring
school-relatedtimes. At the outset of the questionnaire,sexual harassment
was defined as unwanted and unwelcome sexual behaviorthat interferes
with one's life (see Note 1 for the exact wording). Studentswere queried
about their experiences with 14 differentforms of sexual harassment.The
wording of each form and the frequencyof reportedoccurrenceof each
form are presented in AppendixA. Aroundeach form, respondentswere
asked such questionsas, "Howwould you feel if someone harassedyou?"
"Haveyou been harassedduringyour school life?" "Whoharassedyou?"
"Wheredid you experience harassment?"
"Whatwere some consequences
of being harassed?"
Data filters. As we aimed to identify students who experienced unwanted sexual attention and behaviors during their school life, it was
importantto verify that the experiences described by students actually
satisfiedour definitionof harassmentand reflectedthe purposeof the study.
Thus,we employedthreedatafiltersto select our studysamplefromthe full
AAUWsample. Studentswho reportedhaving experiencedat least one of
the 14 formsof harassmentalso had to have: (1) identifieda school-related
locationfor the harassment,(2) reporteda school-relatedperson associated
with their experience, and (3) indicated that the experience upset or
bothered them.5Although filters (1) and (2) were meant to reflect our
researchfocus on harassmentin a school setting, filter (3) was meant to
restrictthe reportedharassmentexperiencesto those that fit the definition
of an unwanted or unwelcome sexual occurrence.
Final sample. Based on these criteria,we identified425 respondents
who, although indicatingthat they had experienced at least one form of
harassment,did not strictlyfit our definition.Amongthem,229 (14%)did not
indicatea school-relatedharasser,248 (15%)did not identifya school-related
location associated with their experience, and 175 (11%) replied that
harassmentdid not bother or upset them. As this group'sexperienceswith
sexual harassmentwere ambiguous,we dropped the 425 cases from the
sample. Comparingdemographiccharacteristicsof the excluded group to
the retainedsample, we found that the formerwas somewhatmore likely
391

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen
to be male, African American, and to have lower GPAs than the 1,203
retained cases. We reanalyzed our data to determine whether the exclusion
of the group affected the results reported here by running analyses on the
full sample, which included a dummy-variable for the excluded cases and
a set of interaction terms with demographic controls. We found that they did
not (i.e., neither the exclusion dummy nor the interaction terms were
statistically significant). Though further analysis of this group might be
fruitful in its own right, in the interest of pursuing the stated research
questions, we present no further investigation of them. Four students who
did not indicate whether they had experienced harassment were also
excluded.
The remaining 1,203 students fell into two discrete categories: those
who had and had not experienced sexual harassment in a school setting.
Although this represented a substantial reduction of the original AAUW
sample (26%), the resulting sample accurately reflects the definition of
sexual harassment laid out earlier. Among the full sample of 1,203 students,
889 (74%) reported being harassed. We employed the full sample to
investigate our first research question ("Who is harassed?"),but we limited
our analyses of the second and third research questions ("Whatfactors are
related to the severity of harassment?""Whatare consequences of harassment?") to the 889 students who reported experiencing harassment.
Measures
Dependent measures. Our three dependent measures correspond to the
three research questions. The first is a dummy-coded variable measuring
whether students had been harassed during their school life
(1 = yes, 0 = no). This measure was constructed based on student responses
to the various forms of harassment provided by the survey. If respondents
reported having experienced at least one (but maybe more) forms of
harassment reported in Appendix A, we coded them 1; those responding
"never" to all 14 forms of harassment were coded 0. This dummy-coded
variable served as the outcome variable for analyses addressing our first
research question: "Who is harassed?" Details of the construction and
psychometric properties of this and all other variables used in this study are
provided in Appendix B.
Another measure taps the severity of sexual harassment, for those
students who experienced it. We used a two-step process to construct this
measure: (1) We multiplied the frequency of responses to each of the 14
harassment forms by the degree of "upsetness" they reported for each form
(if it were to happen to them), and (2) we summed these products across
the 14 forms. Transformationand rescaling resulted in a normally distributed
z-score variable, where a higher score represents a more severe harassment
experience. This outcome addressed the second research question--"Which
factors are associated with the severity of harassment?"
Another set of dependent measures consists of three negative conse392

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools

quences students experienced as a result of sexual harassment:academic
problems,psychologicalproblems,and avoidancebehaviors.The academic
problems measure included five behaviorsthat directlyaffect a student's
school performance:talking less in class, paying less attention in class,
findingit hardto study,gettinga lower gradeon a test or paper,and getting
a lower grade in a class. The psychologicalproblemsmeasure,reflecting
stress and anxiety as a result of harassment,included reports of having
troublesleeping and/or eating.The measureof avoidancebehaviorstapped
a wide rangeof strategiesadoptedto avoid individualsor places associated
with harassmentexperiences:not wanting to go to school, staying home
from school or cuttingclass, no longer attendingan extracurricular
activity,
droppinga group of friends,droppinga course, alteringthe route home,
changingseats in class, thinkingaboutchangingschools, stayingaway from
specific places at school, and avoiding the person doing the harassing.
Independentmeasures.The study focuses on two sets of independent
measures:(1) demographiccharacteristics
of studentsand (2) the contextof
sexual harassmentin school. Demographicsinclude gender, age, race/
ethnicity,academicperformanceas measuredby student'sGPA,and parents' education (a proxy for family socioeconomic status or SES).Demoof
graphicsare importantin analysesthatfocus on the social characteristics
those who experience sexual harassment.
Anotherset of measurescapturesthe context of sexual harassment,of
which we tapped four dimensions:(1) students'perceptionof harassment
in their schools; (2) harassmentexperiences of friends (specifically,the
number of forms of harassmentfriends have experienced); (3) whether
students were harassedby a school-relatedadult--principal,teacher, or
other school employee; and (4) whether students themselves were ever
involved in harassingothers in school. Given our preferencefor cultural
theories of sexual harassmentand the sociological approach implied by
these theories,measuresthat define the context and climateof harassment
pervadingthe schools are especially importantin the study.
Analytic Approach
The Hostile Hallways report (AAUW, 1993) employed descriptive methods
to assess the extent of sexual harassment in U. S. public secondary schools.
While a descriptive profile is important, our study may be distinguished from
the AAUW report both by our different approach to data analysis and by the
somewhat reduced sample. Our research questions suggest our aim to assess
the problem of sexual harassment in secondary schools quite
broadly.
Besides identifying the demographic and contextual factors associated with
secondary school students' experiences of sexual harassment, we are also
interested in differentiating those whose experiences are more or less severe
and in identifying the consequences which accrue according to the
severity
of the experience. The nature of our inquiry thus requires a multivariate
analytic approach.
393

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

Descriptiveanalyses. Multivariateanalyses addressing each research
question are preceded by descriptiveanalyses.We first compare students
who have and have not experiencedharassmenton the demographicand
context factorsdescribedabove. Group differenceswere tested in contingency table or t-testformats,as appropriate.A descriptiveanalysisfor the
severity of harassmentinvestigatedseveritylevel for studentswith varied
Suchcomparisonsprovidea pictureof
social and contextualcharacteristics.
how studentsfrom differentgroups experience harassment.
Multivariateanalyses. The need for multivariateanalysisis driven by
associationsamong the demographicand contextualvariablesin the study.
We need to determine the relative magnitudes of associations of each
demographicand contextualfactorto students'harassmentexperiences,net
of other associations. Our first research question, with a dichotomous
outcome(harassedv. not harassed),requiresa logisticregressionmodel that
includes personalfactors(age, gender, race, parentaleducation,GPA)and
contextualfactors.This logisticregressionmodel examinedhow the effects
of particularvariableschanged as other factorswere introduced.
To identifyfactorsthat contributeto the severityof sexual harassment
(for students who were harassed), we employed a 4-step hierarchical
ordinaryleast squaresregression(OLS)model. The entryorderof variables
was similarto the "Whois harassed?"
model. Likethe logisticregression,this
analysis is meant to quantifythe unique importanceof individualfactors
associatedwith the severityof the harassmentexperience.
Our investigationof the third researchquestion again included only
students who reported having been harassed, exploring negative consequences in the form of academicproblems,psychologicalproblems,and
avoidance behaviors.To accommodatethe extreme positive skew of the
distributionsof the three consequence measures,we created a series of
dummyvariablesfor each (describedin AppendixB). As we were interested
in the association of consequences with the severity of harassment,we
categorizedseverity,comparingstudentswith a low score (1 SD below the
mean) and a high score (1 SD above the mean). We again used logistic
methods to estimatethe probabilityof students'experiencingthese consequences as a function of the severityof their harassmentexperience and
their gender.
Caveats
Uncertaincausal direction.The surveydataused for this studywere crosssectional--that is, collected at a single timepoint.However, our analyses
implya causalorder,in thatsome variablesareclassifiedas independentand
others as dependent.Though this analysisstructureis hard to questionfor
demographiccharacteristics(gender, SES,race, ethnicity,and even grades
describe enduring qualities), we are less certain in our classificationof
measuresof "thecontextof harassment"
as independentor exogenous. Our
models suggest that associatingwith friendswho were harassed,engaging
394

Sexual Harassmentin SecondarySchools
in harassment oneself, or attending schools where harassment was common
could cause harassment to occur. That these factors may be associated is not
at question; we admit, however, that the causal order implied by such
models could be reversed. Quite simply, we cannot untangle the complicated question of causal order with these data.
Analysis limited by sampling method. A second caveat is methodological
and relates to how the data were collected. The data structure,with a sample
of students surveyed within randomly sampled schools, would seem ideal
for a stronger test of our hypothesis about the "social context of harassment"
than we conduct here. Examination of the data collection procedures used
by Louis Harris reveals that within-school student samples were composed
of the entire membership of a single class (AAUW, 1993). While the Harris
organization compensated for this sampling scheme by creating design
weights, which allow results to be generalized to students in the nation's
public schools in Grades 8 through 11, it is clear that we cannot generalize
to students within schools. We have employed these weights and generalize
our results to public school students in the nation. But we may not employ
the statistical methodology most appropriate for a school effects study
implied by our research questions (hierarchical linear modeling or HLM
[Bryk & Raudenbush, 1992]). Thus, we are careful to differentiate our
generalizations to social context rather than school context. Unfortunately,
analyses which focus on schools as sociological units (definitely, our
preference) are simply not possible with these data.
Results
Hypothesized Relationships
A major purpose of this study is to evaluate the relative importance of
personal and contextual factors associated with both the occurrence and
severity of adolescents' harassment experiences. Personal characteristics
included measures of social and academic status. Factors describing the
context of harassment included students' perceptions of the prevalence of
sexual harassment in their current school, among their friends, and their own
involvement in harassing behaviors.
We hypothesized that some personal status characteristicswere associated with harassment experiences (i.e., gender). We also predicted that the
social context in which students operate would have an independent effect
on harassment experiences--that is, the more harassment that occurs in an
individual's environment, the greater the risk that the individual would
experience it. We reasoned that the prevalence of harassment in any school
and the harassment experiences of friends would be associated with both
the occurrence and severity of harassment experiences. Students who had
harassed others would also be at greater risk of being harassed than students
who had not harassed others.
The hypotheses we pose about personal characteristicsand the context

395

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

of harassmentare not based on others'empiricalevidence,because the type
of analysesin this studyare new. Rather,they rest on the theoriesof sexual
theoriesaboutabuse of power and
harassmentdescribedearlier,particularly
culture,and moregeneraltheoriesof social deviance.We expandthe notion
of social hegemony in these theoriesto includerace, social class, and status
associatedwith academicachievementand locate sexual harassmentas a
deviantbehavior.Power-basedtheories commonlyreporta negative associationbetween victimizationand social advantage.The modest amountof
availableevidence suggests thatsexual harassmentis deviantbehaviorof a
somewhat differentsort, centered mostly on the basic power differential
between the sexes. This suggests that one personal characteristic,gender,
may predominate.Hypotheses about the effects of contextualfactorsare
consistentwith the culturaltheories presentedat the outset.
Likelihood of Being Sexually Harassed
Descriptive results. Table 1 displays results of a series of bivariate comparisons between students who said that they had experienced harassment
(74%) and those who said that they had never been harassed (26%). Girls

were considerablymorelikelythanboys to have been harassed(83 v. 60%).
Older students and those in higher grades (obviously related) were more
likely to experience harassment, not surprising given that the survey asked
students to report harassment over their entire school life. Demographic
factors other than gender and age-race/ethnicity, school performance (as
measured by grades or GPA), and parents' education--did not statistically
distinguish between those who had and had not been harassed. Thus, the
occurrence of sexual harassment is uncircumscribed by traditional social
boundaries, except for gender.
Contextual factors are more strongly associated with the experience of
harassment than demographics. Students perceiving high levels of harassment in their schools are very likely to have been harassed themselves
(effect size [ES]= .80 SD).6 Students who report that their friends had more
harassment experiences are also very likely to have themselves experienced
harassment (ES = 1.20 SD). Harassed students are also very much more likely
to say that they themselves have harassed someone at least once during their

school life (72 v. 18%,ES=1.08SD). These very large effects led us to
conclude that the likelihoodof being harassedis not only a matterof who
you are; rather,that likelihood is powerfully shaped by the amount of
harassmentthat surroundsyou, includingyour own harassingbehaviors-that is, the social context in which you are located.
Multivariatelogisticresults.We expandedon the bivariaterelationships
in Table 1 with a multivariatelogistic regression,the resultsof which are
displayedin Table2. We enteredvariableshierarchically,
beginningwith age
and gender (Model 1), and then otherstudentdemographicfactors(Models
2 and 3). The full model also adds contextualfactors(Model4). Coefficients
are in a log-odds metric.Because older studentswere also more likely to
396

Sexual Harassmentin SecondarySchools
Table1
Descriptive Informationon VariablesUsed in Sexual HarassmentStudy
Have you ever been sexuallyharassed?
No

Yes

(N = 314)

(N = 889)a

26.5

73.5

16.6
39.8

83.4 ***
60.2

25.7
25.7
34.5

74.3
74.3
65.5

32.8

67.2 **

31.4
23.1
19.2
14.92
3.00
14.39

68.6
76.9
80.8
15.23 **
3.04
14.28

82.0
28.0
-0.92
-0.65

18.0 ***
72.0
0.28 ***
0.15 ***

Percentage (%)
Demographiccharacteristics
Student'sgender
%Female
%Male
Student'srace
"%
Others
"%
Black
% Hispanic
Student'sgrade
% 8th grade

%9th grade
"%
10th grade
"%
11lthgrade
Student'sage
Student'sGPA
Yearsof parentaleducation
Contextof harassment
Have you ever harassed others?
% No
"%
Yes
Harassmentexperiences of friendsb
Student'sperception of harassmentat schoolb
**p <.01; **p <5.001.

size was unweighted,and analyseswere weighted.
"aSample
bVariableswere standardized, M = 0, SD = 1.

have friends who had experienced harassment, attend schools in which
more harassment was occurring, and to have engaged in harassing behavior
themselves, the association between age and having been harassed dropped
to nonsignificance once these contextual factors were controlled.
Four factors show strong effects on whether or not a student experienced harassment (p < .001), the largest of which is whether the student
himself/herself has harassed someone else (coefficient of 2.73). Gender also
has a very large effect (1.82), indicating that girls are much more likely than
boys to be harassed, regardless of demographic status, surroundings, the
experiences of friends, or their own behavior. Although considerably smaller
in magnitude, the measure of school harassment culture (.41) is still highly
significant in statistical terms, as is the measure tapping the harassment
experiences of friends (.34). Although gender has a powerful independent

397

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

Table2

of BeingHarassedOne
LogisticRegressionforProbability
or MoreTimes
Log-Oddscoefficientsa
(N = 1,025)b
Independentvariables

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

-2.41*
-3.04*** -2.60*
Intercept
Student'sage
0.23*** 0.22*** 0.22***
Female student
1.35*** 1.34*** 1.36***
Student'srace
Black
0.14
0.11
Hispanic
-0.34
-0.36
Yearsof parentaleducation
-0.02
-0.02
Student'sGPA
-0.07
Harassmentexperiences of friends
Student'sperception of harassmentat school
Have you ever harassed others?

Model4c
-1.51
-0.86
1.82***
-0.30
-0.68
-0.01
0.13
0.34***
0.41***
2.73***

*p<-.05;**p .01;***p5 .001.

"aCoefficients
are in a log-oddsmetric,being harassedvs. not being harassed. Positive
coefficientsincreasethe odds of being harassed;negativecoefficientsdecreasethe odds.
bSamplesize reduceddue to nonresponseon some independentvariables.
for log-likelihoodis 628.92for the finalmodel. The model accuratelypredicts
cChi-square
65%of those not harassedand 95%of those harassedat least once.

effecton the probabilityof being harassed,we foundno indicationof gender
interactionswith other variablesin the full model (Model 4). Neitherrace,

ethnicity, parents' education, nor academic standing are associated with the

likelihood of being sexually harassed.

Victims and Perpetrators
The results in Table 2 raise a complex but fundamental set of questions:
among adolescents, who is a victim of harassment, who is a perpetrator, and
who is altogether free of the harassment experience in school? While girls
are more likely to be victims of sexual harassment, our results suggest that
there is no relationship between other indicators of social status and
victimization. However, the likelihood of experiencing harassment is strongly
associated with students' own harassing behavior. On one hand, all the
students in our sample who said that they had been harassed could be called
victims, because they had received unwanted sexual attention. Nonetheless,
nearly three quarters of those who had been victims also said that they had
been a perpetrator at least once in their school life.
To explore further the relationship between being harassed and harassing behavior, we divided the sample into four groups: those who had never
been either a recipient or an instigator of sexual harassment, those who had

398

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools
been harassed but had harassed no one themselves (victims only), those
who had never been harassed but had harassed others (perpetrators only),
and those who had been harassed and harassed others (both victim and
perpetrator). We considered occurrences of being harassed and being a
harasser separately, summing across the 14 forms for all students (0 = never,
1 = rarely, occasional, or often). Results are presented separately by gender
in Figure 1. Relatively few students, 15%of girls and 31% of boys, said that
their school lives were untouched by sexual harassment. Although girls were
far more likely than boys to report having been exclusively a victim
(31 v. 7%), boys were more likely than girls to have described themselves
as exclusively a perpetrator (9 v. 1%).Most surprising is that the majorityof
both genders (53 %) described themselves as having been both victim and
perpetrator of harassment-that is, most students had both been harassed
and harassed others.
The proportions shown in Figure 1 tell only a partial story. As discussed
earlier, our ability to pursue this question further is limited by the fact that
our data are not longitudinal. We cannot say which came first, harassing
others or being harassed (although the structureof our analysis presupposes
a direction). In any case, the overlap between these experiences runs
counter to any explanation of sexual harassment based solely on differential
social or power status. At the least, it suggests that the line between victims
and perpetrators is very fuzzy. The large majority of adolescents who
experience harassment have also harassed someone else sometime during
Percentage
(%)
60
52.9 52.5
50

40
31.1

31.0

30

20

14.6

10

9.3

7.1
1.4
0
Never been harassed,
never harassedothers

Been harassed,never
harassedothers

Never been harassed,
harassedothers

Been harassed,
harassedothers

D Girls mBoys

Figure1.Percentagesof girlsand boys beingharassedand harassing
others
399

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

their school life. Over half of all students, equivalent by gender, have
experienced harassmentboth as victim and perpetrator.
Severityof SexualHarassment
Our index of the severity of harassmentexperiences combines three
elements: (1) the degree of upsetness reported for the various forms of
harassment,(2) the frequencywith which students said they experienced
each form, and (3) the numberof differentforms experienced.Restricting
our analysisof this outcome to those studentswho had been harassed,we
used almost the same multivariatemodel as our analysisof the likelihood
of harassment.One exceptionwas addinga measureof whetherthe student
had been harassedby a school-relatedadult (principal,teacher, or staff
member).Given our focus here on the severityof school-basedharassment
experiences, the status of the harasserseemed importantto consider.
Descriptiveresults.Table 3 presentsbivariateresults--thatis, the mean
severityscore for subgroupsof the secondaryschool populationof harassed
students. Group differences suggest that demographicfactors are more
importantin determiningthe severityof the harassmentexperiencethan its
occurrence.Girlsare harassedmoreseverelythanboys (ES= .58 SD);Blacks
experience more severe harassmentthan Hispanicand other students(ESs
of .40 SD and .36 SD, respectively);studentsin upper grades are harassed
more severelythan those in lower grades,particularly8th graders.Correlations presented in the lower panel of Table 3 suggest that older students
have more severe harassmentexperiences (r = .10), as do students with
lower GPAs(r = -.15) and studentsfrom less advantagedbackgrounds,as
measuredby parents'education(r = -.09). All group differencesin Table 3,
tested with chi-squareor t statistics,are statisticallysignificant.
The same contextual factors included in the harassmentlikelihood
analysisarestronglyrelatedto severity,measuredby zero-ordercorrelations.
The more severelystudentsare harassed,the more harassmenttheirfriends
experience(r = .50) and the moreharassmentthey perceivegoing on around
them at school (r = .36). Studentswho reportedhaving harassedsomeone
else are harassedmore severelythan theirpeers who did not reporthaving
harassedanyone (ES = .31).
A very large group differencein the severityof sexual harassmentis
whetheror not studentswere harassedby a school-relatedadult(ES= .73).
Althoughwe consideredharassmentby a school-relatedadult in the aggregate in the analyses in Table 3, we also investigatedthis separatelyby
individualswith differentroles (role-identification
was not a disjointoccurrence). Virtuallyall harassedstudentsreportedhaving been harassedby a
fellow student (96%), but very few (2%) reported being harassed by
principals.A largerproportion(16%)reportedharassmentby a teacher,and
almost half experiencedharassmentby a memberof the school staffother
than the principal(44%).Whileharassmentby a principalor fellow student
did not varyby gender, female studentswere significantlymore likely than
400

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools

Table3

on VariablesUsed in AnalyzingSeverity
DescriptiveInformation
of Sexual Harassment(N = 889)8
Subgroup means for severity measureb

Student'sgender
Female
Male
Student'srace
Others
Black
Hispanic
Student'sgrade
8th grade
9th grade
10th grade
11th grade
Have you ever been harassedby at least one school-relatedadult?
No
Yes
Have you ever harassed others?
No
Yes
Correlationwith severity
Student'sage
Student'sGPA
Yearsof parentaleducation
Harassmentexperiences of friends
Student'sperception of harassmentat school
*p

.05; **p

.01; ***p

0.15***c
-0.43
-0.12***
0.28
-0.08
-0.24*
-0.05
0.05
-0.02
-0.39***
0.34
-0.29***
0.02
0.10**
-0.15***
-0.09**
0.50***
0.36***

.001.

size was unweighted,and analyseswere weighted.
"aSample
bDependent variablewas standardized, M = 0, SD = 1.
cDifferencestestedwith chi-squareor t-test statistics,as appropriate.

theirmale counterpartsto reportharassmentby a teacher(20 v. 8 %/6)
or by
a staff member(48 v. 37%).
Multivariateregressionresults.Table 4 presentsOLSregressionresults
on the severity of sexual harassment.Again, we structuredthe analysis
hierarchically.The relativemagnitudesof effects are quite similarto those
reportedin Table 2. The resultsin Table 4 are shown in a differentmetric
(standardized[81g
coefficients);the absolutemagnitudesare not meaningful,
the
z-score
metricof the outcome.The largesteffect in Model4 is the
given
prevalence of harassmentexperiences among friends (f8 = .37). Gender
againhas a largeeffect on the severityof harassmentexperiences(f8= .26),
with girls more severely harassedthan boys. Studentswho attendschools
with high levels of harassmentthemselvesexperience more severe harassment (8g= .17). Studentswho reportedhaving harassedothers were also
401

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

Table4

OLSRegressionon Severityof SexualHarassment
Standardized
regressioncoefficients(13)

(N= 889)"

variables
Independent
Student'sage

Model1 Model2 Model3 Model4 Model5
0.10** 0.11*** 0.08*

Femalestudent
Black student
Hispanic student
Student'sGPA
Yearsof parentaleducation
Harassedby at least one
school-related adult
Harassmentexperiences of friends
Have you ever harassedothers?
Student'sperception of
harassmentat school
R2 (Proportionof
variance explained)
AR 2

0.06

-0.03

0.28*** 0.30*** 0.26*** 0.26***
0.11*** 0.08*
0.05
-0.01
-0.01
-0.02
-0.15*** -0.13*** -0.11***
-0.00
-0.02
-0.03
0.31***

0.21***
0.37***
0.11"**
0.17***

0.01

0.09
0.13
0.08*** 0.04***

0.22
0.09***

0.43
0.21***

*ps .05; **p .01; ***p .001.
size was unweighted,and analyseswere weighted.
"aSample

harassedmore severely(S5= .11), althoughthe lattereffect is less prominent
for severitythan occurrence(Table2). Therewas no indicationthatgender
effects on the severityof harassmentdifferby demographiccharacteristics
or contexts, because interactionterms between gender and other model
variableswere nonsignificant(neitherindividuallynor as a set).
Table 4 shows several noteworthy differences from the likelihood
analysis in Table 2. Lower performingstudents (with lower GPAs) are
harassedmoreseverelythanstudentswith higherGPAs(SL= -.11).Academic
status,therefore,is associatedwith the severityof harassmentbut not with
being harassed.Moreover,demographicmodels indicatea greaterseverity
of harassmentexperiencedby Black students(Model 2, 8 = .11), although
the effectis attenuatedwhen contextualfactorsareintroduced.Thissuggests
that Black students have more severe harassmentexperiences, at least in
part,because they are schooled in a contextwhere moreharassmentoccurs.
Being harassedby a school-relatedadulthas a strongindependenteffect on
severity(S5= .21). Nonetheless,even given importantdifferencesin the two
analyses (differentoutcomes and differentsamples), we are struckby the
similarityof findings between Tables 2 and 4. In each analysis, gender,
school culture,the prevalenceof friends'being harassed,and students'own
harassingbehaviorsstronglyinfluenceboth the likelihoodand characterof

402

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools
adolescents' harassment experiences. These associations thus represent
particularly sturdy findings.
Consequences of Harassment
The AAUW survey included a series of questions about students' responses
to being harassed. We used factor analysis to identify three broad sets of
consequences-academic
problems, psychological problems, and avoidance behaviors-the components of which are listed in Appendix B. Skewed
distributions for these measures led us to create a series of overlapping
dichotomous comparisons-none versus one or more, none or one versus
two or more. From logistic regression results, we calculated probabilities of
progressively higher numbers of consequences given the severity of harassment experienced. Comparative probabilities for each consequence set, for
students experiencing high and low degrees of the severity of harassment,
are displayed in Figures 2-4. The pattern for all consequences was similar
and predictable: The more severely students were harassed, the greater the
likelihood that they experienced academic or psychological problems or
used avoidance behaviors. There was also a net effect associated with
gender, particularlyfor psychological problems and avoidance behaviors. In
both cases, girls were more likely to report these consequences, even when
their differential severity of harassment experiences was taken into account.
Academic problems. Figure 2 shows that nearly half (46%) of the
students who had been harassed report that the experience resulted in one
or more of the five academic problems queried in the survey. Students with
high severity scores have a two in three chance of one or more problems
(probability of .62 for boys, .68 for girls), a one in two chance of at least two
Probabilityof AcademicProblems
1

OLowSeverityScore
0.8 High SeverityScore

0.8
0.68
0.62

0.6

0.48
0.40

0.4

0.37

0.29

0.29

0.23
0.2

0.13 0.16

0

0.05 0.07
M

F
M
Oneor More

F

M

F

M F
Two or More

M

F
M
Threeor More

F

Numberof AcademicProblemsStudentsHave Experienced

Figure2. Probabilityof male and female students experiencing academic problems given severity of sexual harassment
403

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

problems(.40 for boys, .48 for girls),and a one in three chance of three or
moreproblems(.29 for boys, .37 for girls).Studentswith low severityscores
were less likelyto experienceproblemsof this type, thoughmore than 25%
of these students reportedone or more academicproblems as a result of
being harassed(.23 for boys, .29 for girls).
Psychologicalproblems.Over a quarterof all harassedstudents(28%)
reportexperiencingone or both of the psychologicalproblemsmentioned
in the survey, as Figure3 shows. There is a .31 probabilitythat boys with
very severe harassmentexperienceseitherhad troublesleeping or lost their
appetite and a .11 probabilityof experiencingboth. Girlswith very severe
harassmentexperiences had higher probabilitiesof these problems:a .48
probabilityfor at least one problem and .20 for both. Studentswith low
severityscores are unlikelyto experience psychologicalproblems.
Avoidancebehaviors.Nearlythree quartersof harassedstudents(73%)
reportedconsideringor attemptingone of 10 queriedavoidancebehaviors,
the most common of which is (understandably)avoidingthe person doing
the harassing(see Figure4). Severely harassedboys had a three in four
chance of at least one avoidancebehavior(.73); a one in two chance of at
least two such behaviors(.55); and a one in three chance of eitherthree or
more, or five or more, avoidancebehaviors(.38 and .31, respectively).Girls
were especially likely to report avoidance behaviors. Nearly all severely
harassedgirls reportedat least one avoidancebehavior(.91), three in four
engaged in two or more (.77), three in five in at least three (.61), and two
in five reportedat least five (.39). Lessseverelyharassedstudentswere less
likelyto engage in these behaviors,but even these studentshave a relatively
high probabilityof engagingin at leasttwo behaviorsmeantto avoidfurther
harassment(.26 for boys, .50 for girls).
of Psychological
Problems
Probability
1-

[]

0.8

LowSeverityScore
HighSeverityScore

0.6
0.48
0.4
0.2

0.31
-

0.18

0.20

0.03
M

F

M
Oneor More

F

M

10.06
F

M
BothProblems

F

Numberof Psychological
ProblemsStudentsHaveExperienced

Figure3. Probabilityof male and female students experiencing psychological problems given severity of sexual harassment
404

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools
Probabilityof AvoidanceBehaviors

[-] LowSeverityScore

1 0.8

-

0.6

-

0.91
0.73

High SeverityScore
0.77

0.73

0.61

0.55
"0.440.5

0.4

0.39

0.38

0.260.

0.2

0.14

M

F

M

OneorMore

F

M

F

MF

MF

MF

MF

MF

FiveorMore
ThreeorMore
TwoorMore
HaveExperienced
of Avoidance
Behaviors
Students
Number

Figure4. Probabilityof male and female students experiencing avoidance behaviors given severity of sexual harassment
These results suggest that harassmentis disruptivefor adolescents,
particularlyfor girls. The more severely students are harassed,the more
likely and numerous the consequences. Harassed students, even those
whose harassmentis not severe, most often engage in avoidancebehaviors
to guard againstbeing harassedfurther.Moreover,harassedstudentsalso
experience academic and psychologicalproblems,particularlythose who
are harassedmost severely.
Discussion
Summaryof Results
Prevalenceofharassment.An importantfindingfromthisstudyis thatsexual
harassmentis a very common occurrencein U. S. secondarypublicschools.
Our results document the pervasiveness of unwanted sexual attention
among adolescents,because almostthree fourthsof studentsreporthaving
experiencedit in a school setting.This troublingfindingis not new; rather,
it confirmsdescriptiveinformationreportedelsewhere (AAUW,1993;National Councilfor Researchon Women, 1994;Steinet al., 1993). Nevertheless, we underlinethis soberingand troublingconditionin U. S. secondary
schools as a baseline for other study findings.
Personal characteristicsrelatedto harassment.Our hypotheses about
harassmentbeing relatedto social statusare only partlyconfirmed.It is clear
that sexual harassment,both its occurrence and its severity, is strongly
related to gender. Although 60% of high school boys are recipients of
unwantedsexual attention,adolescentgirls are considerablymore likely to
405

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen

experience harassmentin school (83% do). Even taking the context of
harassmentinto account,the probabilityof girls'experiencingharassmentis
considerablyhigher than for boys. Unlike some types of social deviance,
however, neitherthe occurrencenor the severityof harassmentare related
to eitherfamilysocial class or race/ethnicity,once contextis accountedfor.
Though students'academicperformanceis unrelatedto the probabilityof
being harassed, for those students who experience it, those with lower
academicperformancehave more severe harassmentexperiences.
Thesocial context of harassment.Our most importantand most troubling findings relate to the environmentof harassmentthat permeates
Americanpublic high schools. We defined the environment,or context, of
harassmentalong severaldimensions:studentsthemselves,theirfriends,and
their schools. Findings strongly support our research hypotheses about
context. First,over half of all students,girls and boys alike, reporthaving
both experiencedharassmentand harassedothersin school. Becausethese
studentsalso reporthavingbeen upset by the experienceof harassment,we
contend that it is inappropriateto write off these behaviorsas "harmless"
adolescent sexuality. Studentswho harass others also define their own
experiences of harassmentas more severe. Secondly,harassmentis more
severe when originatedfrom an adult in the school than from another
student.Though the effect is unsurprising,the high proportionof students
harassedby school employees is startlingnonetheless. Finally,the harassment context also involves friendsand extends to the school itself. Quite
simply,studentsexperiencemore harassment,and more severe formsof it,
in schools where they describe harassmentas a serious problem.
Harassmenthas consequences.The data allow only a weak test of our
hypotheses about the consequences of harassment.The hypotheses were
confirmed by all analyses allowed with these data; they indicate that
harassmenthas negative academic, psychological,and behavioralconsequences (especially for girls). The full extent of these consequences is
unclear.Cross-sectionalsurveydata fromnationallyrepresentativesamples
of secondaryschool students(such as we employed) are ideal for investigating questionsabout prevalenceand severity.However, a properexploration of the full consequences of sexual harassmentwould be better
accomplishedthroughpersonalinterviews,allowing studentsto define the
type and extent of consequences, ratherthan forcingthem to choose from
a predeterminedand ratherthin response set. To investigatethe durationof
consequences, studentsshould be interviewedat severaltimepointsand at
some temporaldistance from the events. Thus, we admit that our results
permitonly limitedconclusions about the consequences of sexual harassment-a lower bound at best. Although we identified negative consequences of experiencing sexual harassmentwith these data, anecdotal
reports suggest that they are more profound, more complex, and more
enduringthan those reportedhere (Stein et al., 1993, provide some anecdotal information).
406

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools
Revisiting the Theories of Sexual Harassment
Theories not supported by results. These results underline at least one
common social notion about sexual harassment: It is a serious problem in
our society, one we need to address. We briefly re-examine the theories of
sexual harassment in light of our findings. For example, its prevalence in
U. S. secondary schools undercuts the pathology theory's validity, implying
severely antisocial behavior in individuals amenable to therapeutic response. It would be folly to consider either individual or group therapy for
the majority of the high school population. Another misconception, that
females are exclusively victims and males are perpetrators of sexual harassment, is not supported by our results.
That such classic societal stratification factors as race, ethnicity, social
class, and academic performance are either unrelated or very modestly
related to adolescent sexual harassment raises a question about the usefulness of the more general abuse of power theories in educational settings.
For the most part, gender is the only social background factor that counts
here. Differential power may be more of an issue in the workplace than in
schools; students can seldom be fired, and their legal rights are rather well
defined. We conclude that common forms of framing the problem of sexual
harassment, in gendered terms organized around the victim/perpetrator
model, are misleading. It is possible that the dynamics of harassment in
schools, which largely involve peers, differ substantially from harassment in
the workforce, where the biology, pathology, and abuse of power theories
have been located.
On the other hand, our results should not be used to trivialize the
problem. "Ifso many students are engaging in harassment,"some might say,
"perhaps it is not a problem." Recall that our definition required that a
harassed student must indicate that the experience was unwanted. By
definition, sexual harassment is victimization. Students who are victimized
at one point may respond by victimizing others at another. We suggest that
sexual harassment is among the multiplicity of problems faced by contemporary American high schools and that it is an important one that should be
moved toward the top of the list.
Some cultural theories are neither applicable nor useful. For example,
the Freudian cultural approach would encourage repressing or sublimating
hostile sexuality. Though adults should surely exercise control over behaviors that threaten the social order, denying the existence of these forces
among adolescents seems futile within current social norms. Nor is critical
theory particularlyhelpful, as this approach would locate sexual harassment
within the many socialization roles that schools perform to "prepare"
students to function in a flawed society organized around alienation and
capitalist consumerism. Criticaltheory would see schools as active agents for
perpetuating injustices in the larger society, rather than as potentially
positive socializing agents for youth.
407

Lee, Croninger,Linn, & Chen
Theoriessupported by results. One form of the abuse of power theory,
abuse of organizational power, seems applicable. Sizable proportions of
students (especially girls) are harassed by school officials: principals, teachers, and staff. Because such people occupy positions of authority over
students, harassment by them is a clear abuse of organizational power. The
fact that victims see harassment by school officials as especially severe
further supports the theory's applicability.
As discussed, we find some cultural theories of sexual harassment most
appropriate, particularly those formed around the structural and ethical
views. These theories are helpful in guiding effective responses to the
problem in schools because of the importance they afford school norms in
influencing the behaviors of school members. The theories part company
around which norms would be targeted to ameliorate harassment. Structural
theory would support the development and enforcement of programs and
policies, many of them quite formal and explicit, while ethical theory would
direct attention to moral norms and values.
Policy Implications for Sexual Harassment in Schools
Existing policies. Currentnational attention to sexual harassment is strong in
several settings: workplaces, higher educational institutions, and (more
recently) K-12 schools. Employers and educators are becoming sensitized
to the issues, policies are being designed and/or strengthened, and a legal
and enforcement structure targeted on the issue now extends from individual workplaces or schools, through local courts, to the U. S. Congress and
even the Supreme Court. These policies and laws share a similar structure
and purpose: to define harassment carefully, to urge victims to recognize
and report harassment incidents, and to identify and punish perpetrators of
harassment. Such responses are consistent with a narrowly defined structural
approach to the problem.
In general, this policy structure assumes the victim/perpetrator model.
Though technically not an issue (as policies must be gender-neutral),
responses typically are designed around the view of female victims and male
perpetrators. Having any structure in place to respond to the problem is
good, but the existing structure has recognized faults. Publicly identifying
oneself as a victim is not without cost; the burden of proof rests on the
accuser. Women coming forward with claims of harassment are often seen
as inviting sexual attention, and men who are accused of harassment are
often excused by "the pressures of the job." Consider the recent attention
on the issue around Anita Hill, Clarence Thomas, and Bob Packwood.
Our study raises questions about the adequacy of the structuralpolicy
model for eliminating sexual harassment. When over half of all high school
students (male and female) identify themselves as having occupied both the
victim and perpetrator roles, it is difficult to think that a policy of punishing
the perpetrator and protecting the victim will be effective in eliminating
408

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools
sexual harassment in schools. Moreover, the pervasiveness of harassment in
the nation's secondary schools certainly raises the question of how successful such a policy approach could ever be. The policy probably makes sense
when applied in cases with clear power differentials, as unequal power is
sometimes used to coerce the less powerful into unwanted sexual activity.
We support such policies when directed toward adults in schools--principals, teachers, school staff-because these people fill roles with considerable power over students. When adult harassers lose their jobs, when
employers are required to provide financial compensation to harassees,
people pay attention. The large majority of school-based harassment,
however, occurs between students. Moreover, male students frequently
identify themselves as victims. Harassment policies designed on the structural model are inadequate and inappropriate under such circumstances.
Reconceptualizing policy. We suggest that social policy in general, and
school policies in particular, move beyond the structural response and
victim/perpetrator models of sexual harassment. Certainly sexual harassment in schools should be taken seriously. Our results show that, in fact,
unwanted and uninvited sexual attention is almost out of control in U. S.
secondary schools. Rather than trying to isolate the issue by punishing the
guilty (other than school officials)-something that is really almost impossible-sexuality among adolescents should become an important and upfront subject of discussion in schools-a front-burner item.
Enter the ethical dimension of our cultural theory. The general theory,
as applied to schools, implies a substantial shift in how U. S. comprehensive
high schools operate, toward a more communal form and away from the
dominant bureaucratic form. This theory has implications for the social
organization of schools (whose missions would be to develop students into
adults who, although successful in the world as it is, would also question
the society as it stands, rather than as high scorers on tests and big earners),
for teachers (who would see themselves less as subject-matterspecialists and
more as developers of student character writ large), and for students (who
would be encouraged to directly confront and question important social
values and mores). For a full development of these ideas, see Bryk, Lee, and
Holland (1993) and Lee, Bryk, and Smith (1993).
We support a move in high schools toward much more discussion of
basic democratic values, where moral and ethical questions are hotly
debated. We are drawn to Amy Gutmann's (1987) recommendation that we
move away from the "value neutrality"of today's schools. A value-sensitive
school culture would support the inclusion of sexuality in the public
dialogue, where teachers would not fear that discussing it would be
misinterpreted as advocating it. When the focus rests on a punish-the-guilty
policy, schools may think they are isolating or minimizing attention to issues
of sexuality, an issue about which they are probably quite fearful. For
problems this pervasive and troubling to students, students' own voices
about how to bring them under control should be encouraged. Although we
409

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen
are certainly in agreement with the suggestions of the National Council for
Research on Women (1994) concerning legislative initiatives and good
sexual harassment policies, we suggest that neither legislation nor policies
alone can fully address a problem that, in part, defines the very social
context of secondary education.
Recommendations. In light of our criticism of existing policy (or lack
thereof), we posit three categories of recommendations: (1) expand the
"public"agenda of schools, (2) recognize difficulties students confront, and
(3) model behaviors. We suggest that open and frank discussions of ethical
questions and moral issues among students and staff in secondary schools
are a good place to start. Such an expansion of the agenda for schools rests
in a larger recommendation: Schools simply must recognize students'
priorities and voices. Broadening the agenda for schools means that the
discussion of sexuality, both wanted and unwanted, should be included in
the formal and informal curriculum. This suggests that adolescent and adult
sexuality must enter the literature, writing, and social studies curriculum at
all grade levels, certainly before high school.
Our findings suggest that adolescent attitudes about sexual harassment
are ambivalent. Although they describe these behaviors as unwanted and
hurtful, and have little trouble recognizing them, a majorityof students (girls
and boys alike) also engage in them. Young people must be held accountable for their behavior; behaviors harmful to others simply cannot be
tolerated in schools. Nonetheless, policy should also acknowledge students'
ambivalence and provide administrators and teachers with a range of
intervention strategies to respond to incidents of sexual harassment (including suspension, group counseling, and public apology). Even more important than responding to the occurrence of harassment in schools, policies
should also be targeted at prevention. In this regard, we are encouraged by
the National Education Association's intent to publish a curriculumon sexual
harassment for students.7 Helping students understand, recognize, and
address their own ambivalence about sexual harassment (indeed, about
sexuality generally) should be a meaningful component of every secondary
school's curriculum.
Besides broadening the ethical agenda of schools and recognizing the
difficulties students face in dealing with sexual harassment, the adults in
schools should serve as models for respectful cross-status relations. Administrators and teachers need to examine their own schools' cultures to locate
mixed messages, contradictions, and hypocrisies communicated to students
and other members of the school community. Public awareness of each
school's commitment to a harassment-free environment must be created
through the actions of administrators and teachers-in enforcing existing
sexual harassment policies, in appointments to positions of leadership and
authority, in recognizing accomplishments and achievement, and in communicating with one another and with the broader school community. By these
means, adults may shape an environment where students can develop more
410

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools

positive ways of acknowledgingand expressingtheirsexuality.Ignoringor
trivializingthis importantproblem in schools will not make it go away.
APPENDIXA

Percentage of male and female students having ever experienced 14
forms of sexual harassment (N = 889)
Percentage(0%)
100 -

] MaleStudents

92.0

2.

Female Students

83.2

828

"80

74.9
64.9

60

47.1
47.1

57.8 58.5

-45.9

50.0

32.0

50.1

51.2

31.7

,

25.9 26.6

.LI

.0

1

28.5

25.3



2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Formsof SexualHarassment:
1. Madesexualcomments,jokes, gestures,or looks
8. Touched,grabbed,or pinchedyou in a sexualway
brushedup againstyou in a sexualway
2. Showedyou sexualpictures,photographs,
messages,etc. 9. Intentionally
3. Wrotesexualmessagesaboutyou on bathroomwalls,etc.10.Pulledat yourclothingin a sexualway
4. Spreadsexualrumorsaboutyou
11.Pulledyourclothingoff or down
5. Saidyou weregay or a lesbian
12.Blockedyourwayor corneredyou in a sexualway
13.Forcedyou to kiss him/her
6. Spiedon you as you dressedor showeredat school
14.Forcedyou to do somethingsexual,otherthankissing
7. Flashedor moonedyou

APPENDIXB

Summaryof Variables Used in Analyses
Dependent Variables
A. Studenteverbeingsexuallyharassed. Dummycoded so that1 = studentreported
experiencingatleastone of 14formsof sexualharassmentand0 = none. Thel4 sexual
harassmentformswere coded as 1 = never, 2 = rarely,3 = occasional,and 4 = often.
We recodedthem so thatnever = 0 and rarely,occasionally,or often = 1. If a student
was coded 1 for at least one formof sexual harassment,we consideredthis student
as having experienced sexual harassment.Seventy-threepercent (73.5%)of the
sample reportedhaving experiencedat least one form of sexual harassment.The
percentagesfor male and female studentsare 60.2%and 83.4%,respectively.
B. Severityofsexual harassmentmeasure,combiningfrequencyof and anxietyabout
sexual harassment experience. The sexual harassment items were recoded

411

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen
to 0 = never, 1 = rarely,2 = occasional,and 3 = often.The coding of students'upset
abouteach of the sexual harassmentitemsis 1 = not at all upset, 2 = not very upset,
3 = somewhatupset, and 4 = very upset. We firstmultipliedstudents'reportabout
the frequencyof each form of sexual harassmentby the degree of upset about the
correspondingsexual harassmentitem.Then we summedthese 14 products.As the
(which
resultingmeasurewas skewed,we used its naturallogarithmictransformation
madeit normallydistributed)andthen standardizedit. Thus,thismeasurehas a mean
(Al)of 0 and standarddeviation(SD) of 1, with a rangeof -2.24 to 2.67. Reliability
(Cronbachalpha) = 0.84.
C. Consequencesof sexual harassment.
Thefiveacademicproblemswe consideredarestudents'report
1.Academicproblems.
of (a) talkingless in class,(b) payingless attentionin class,(c) findingit hardto study,
(d) gettinga lowergradeon a test or a paper,and (e) gettinga lowergradein a class.
Eachwas dummycoded, 1 = studentexperiencedthe problemafterbeing harassed
and 0 = no. We summedthese five academicproblemsand then recoded the sum
intoa seriesof dichotomousvariables:(a) 1 = studentshave experiencedone or more
academicproblemsand 0 = none, (b) 1 = studentshave experiencedtwo or more
academic problems and 0 = students have experienced none or one academic
problems,(c) 1 = studentshave experiencedthreeor more academicproblemsand
0 = studentshave experiencednone or one or two academicproblems.Forty-seven
percent (46.6%)of harassed students reported having experienced at least one
academicproblemas a resultof being harassed.Reliability(Cronbachalpha)= 0.84.
2. Psychologicalproblems. The two psychological problems we considered are
students'reportof (a) havingtroublesleepingand(b) losingappetiteor losinginterest
in eating.Eachwas dummycoded, 1 = studentexperiencedthe problemafterbeing
harassedand0 = no. Wesummedthesetwo psychologicalproblemsandthenrecoded
the sum into a series of dichotomousvariables:(a) 1 = studentshave experienced
one or morepsychologicalproblemand 0 = none, (b) 1 = studentshave experienced
two psychological problems and 0 = students have experienced none or one
psychologicalproblems.Twenty-eightpercent(28.3%)of harassedstudentsreported
havingexperiencedat leastone psychologicalproblemas a resultof being harassed.
Correlationbetween these two psychologicalproblems= 0.66.
3. Avoidancebehaviors.The 10 avoidancebehaviorswe consideredare students'
reportof (a) not wantingto go to school, (b) stayinghome from school or cutting
class,(c) stoppingattendingan extracurricular
activity,(d) droppinggroupof friends,
(e) droppingout of a course, (f) changingthe route going home, (g) changingseat
in a class, (h) thinkingaboutchangingschools, (i) stayingaway fromsome specific
placesatschool,and(j)avoidingpersondoingthe harassing.Eachwas dummycoded,
1 = studentexperiencedthe problemafterbeing harassedand 0 = no. We summed
these 10 avoidancebehaviorsand then recodedthe sum into a seriesof dichotomous
variables:(a) 1 = studentshave experiencedone or more avoidancebehaviors,and
0 = none; (b) 1 = studentshave experiencedtwo or more avoidancebehaviors,and
0 = studentshave experiencednone or one avoidancebehaviors;(c) 1 = students
have experienced three or more avoidance behaviors, and 0 = students have
experienced none or one or two avoidance behaviors;(d) 1 = students have
experiencedfive or more avoidancebehaviors,and 0 = studentshave experienced
412

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools
none or less thanfive avoidancebehaviors.Seventy-threepercent(73.2%)of harassed
studentsreportedhavingexperiencedat least one avoidancebehavioras a resultof
being harassed.Reliability(Cronbachalpha) = 0.87.
Independent

Variables

Student'sgender. Dummy coded, 1 = female, and 0 = male. Fifty-seven percent (57.2%)
are female.
Student's minority status. Two dummy coded variables created: (a) 1 = Black and
0 = other, (b) 1 = Hispanic and 0 = other. Fifteen percent (14.5%) of students are
Black, and 9% (8.9%) of students are Hispanic. The rest are White or Asian.
Student's age. The coding is 11 = 11 years old or younger, 12 = 12 years old,...18 = 18
years old, 19 = 19 years old or older. This measure ranges from 13 to 19, with M = 15.15
and SD = 1.30.

Student's GPA. The coding is 1 = mostly D & F, 1.5 = mostly C & D, 2 = mostly C,
2.5 = mostly B & C, 3 = mostly B, 3.5 = mostly A & B, 4 = mostly A. This measure

ranges from 1 to 4, with M = 3.03 and SD = 0.77.

Yearsofparental education. This measure represents the years of education obtained
by student's father or mother, whichever is larger. We recoded it so that 10 = less
than high school, 12 = high school graduate, 14 = some college, 16 = college graduate,
and 18 = postcollege education. This measure has M = 14.10 and SD = 2.30.

Studentbeing harassedat least by one school-relatedadult. Dummycoded so that

1 = being harassed at least by one school-related adult and 0 = none. We constructed
this measure by considering students' reports of whether they were harassed by a
teacher, a teacher's aid, a principal, a counselor, a coach, a substitute teacher, a security
guard, a bus driver,or another school employee. If the student reported being harassed
by at least one of these persons, then we assigned code 1 to this measure. Forty-nine
percent (49.2%) of harassed students were harassed by at least one school-related
adult. The remainder were harassed by fellow or former students.
Student's perception of harassment at school. We took the mean of five measures:
students' reports of (1) how often sexual harassment happened in schools, (2) how
often students sexually harassed other students in schools, (3) how often teachers
and other school employees sexually harassed students in schools, (4) how often
students sexually harassed teachers and other school employees in schools, and (5)
how often teachers and other school employees sexually harassed one another in
schools. These five measures were coded 1 = never, 2 = rarely, 3 = occasional, and
4 = often. We standardized (z scored) the measure, with the range from -1.78 to 2.42,

with M = 0 and SD = 1. Reliablity (Cronbach alpha) = 0.69.

Haveyou ever harassed others?Dummy coded so that 1 = a student has harassed others
in at least one of 14 forms of sexual harassment and 0 = a student has never harassed
others. Fifty eight percent (57.7%) of students reported having harassed other schoolrelated persons. The percentages for male and female students are 61.8%and 54.3%,
respectively.

413

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen
Harassment experiences offriends. We summed 14 dummy-coded (1 = yes and 0 = no)
variables, in each of which students reported the sexual harassment experiences of
their friends, and then standardized the sum. This measure ranges from -1.63 to 2.03,
with M = 0 and SD = 1.
Notes
We are gratefulto the AmericanAssociation of UniversityWomen (AAUW)Educational Foundation and to Priscilla Little, Senior Research Associate for the AAUW
EducationalFoundation, for supplying the data for this study. We also appreciate the
financialsupport of the Universityof Michigan'sOffice of the Vice-Presidentfor Research.
However, all errorsof analysis, judgment, and interpretationare ours.
'The AAUW (1993) report and survey used this definition: "Sexualharassment is
unwanted and unwelcome sexual behavior which interferes with your life. Sexual
harassment is not behaviors that you like or want (e.g.: wanted kissing, touching, or
flirting)"(p.6).
2Anothercontext in which to locate these culturaltheories is a set of sociological
models about how social context influences individual behavior. For example, several
models have been proposed to explain effects on childrenof the neighborhoodsin which
they reside or the social mix of the school they attend (e.g., Jencks & Mayer,1990;Mayer
&Jencks, 1989). Two of these models are relevantto our discussion:the contagion model
(which postulates that children influence one another: "like begets like") and the
collective socialization model (which focuses on how adults influence children, both as
role models and as arbitersof the values and norms of the community).
3Criticsof schools explicitly addressing ethical and moral questions might see it as
encroachingon the wall of separationbetween churchand state, increasingthe insularity
of school populations, and overlooking power differences among school clientele
(Bowles, 1986).
4To strengthen the conclusions about minority students by including substantial
numbersof these students, Harrisand Associates actuallyoversampledschools with large
minority enrollments. Spanish language versions of questionnaires were available to
students on request. The weighting procedure adjustedfor the oversamplingof minority
students. To ensure appropriatestatisticaltesting, we adjusted the student weight to a
mean of one for all analyses.
the general descriptionof sexual harassmentpresented at the beginning of
"5Besides
the survey (in Note 1), toward the end of the survey (afterreportingtheir experiences of
harassment),respondents were asked, "Thinkingabout the types of sexual harassment
that you have experienced duringyour school life, which of the following best describes
how you felt right after being harassed, in most cases?"Response categories included
"veryupset,""somewhatupset,""wasn'tvery upset,"and "wasn'tat all upset."Our sweep
dropped any student who had experienced harassmentbut who reported that he or she
"wasn'tat all upset" about it.
6To describe effect sizes in meaningful terms, we follow the standardof Rosenthal
and Rosnow (1984, p. 360). Effects larger than .5 SD are large, effects of .3 - .5 SD
moderate, and effects of .1 - .3 SD small. Effects less than .1 SD are trivial.
7Thecurriculumsuggested by the NEA,targeted for Grades 6-12, includes teacherled discussions, writing exercises, student observations, case studies, and role playing
(Lawton, 1994; Stein & Sjostrom,1994).

References
Alexander v. Yale University, 631 F.2d 178 (2d Cir. 1980).
American Association of University Women [AAUW].(1993). Hostile hallways: The
AAUW survey on sexual harassment in America's schools. Washington, DC:
Author.
Apple, M. W. (1982). Education andpower. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

414

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools
Arnot, M., & Weiner, G. (Eds.). (1987). Gender and thepolitics of schooling. London:
Open University Press.
Aronowitz, S., & Giroux, H. W. (1991). Postmodern education. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Beauvais, K. (1986). Worships to combat sexual harassment. A case study of
changing attitudes. Signs, 12 (1), 130-145.
Bidwell, C. E. (1965). The school as a formal organization. In J. G. March (Ed.),
Handbook of organizations (pp. 972-1019). Chicago: Rand-McNally.
Bowles, S. (1986). Democracy and capitalism: property, community, and the contradictions of modern social thought. NewYork: Basic.
Brodky, L., & Fine, M. (1992). Presence of mind in the absence of body. In K. Weiler,
& C. Mitchell (Eds.), What schools can do: Critical pedogogy and practice
(pp. 75-94). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Bryk, A. S. (1988). Musings on the moral life of schools. American Journal of
Education, 96 (2), 256-290.
Bryk, A. S., & Driscoll, M. E. (1988). The school as community: Theoreticalfoundation, contextual influences, and consequences. Madison, WI: National Center on
Effective Secondary Schools, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Bryk, A. S., Lee, V. E., & Holland, P. B. (1993). Catholic schools and the common
good. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bryk, A. S., & Raudenbush, S. W. (1992). Hierarchical linear models: Applications
and data analysis methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Coleman, J. S., & Hoffer, T. (1987). Public and private high schools: The impact of
communities. New York: Basic.
Collins, E. G. C., & Blodgett, T. B. (1981). Sexual harassment: Some see it...some
won't. Harvard Business Review, 59 (2) pp.76-95.
Cusick, P. A., & Wheeler, C. W. (1988). Educational morality and organization reform.
American Journal of Education, 96 (2), 231-155.
Deal, T. E. (1982). Corporatecultures: The rites and rituals of corporate life. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Dewey, J. (1966). Democracy and education. New York: Macmillan.
Dey, E. L., Sax, L.J., Kom, J., & Ramirez,C. E. (1996, April). Betrayed by the academy:
The sexual harassment of women college faculty. Journal of Higher Education,
67(2), 149-173.
Freud, S . (1949a). Civilization and its discontents. London: Hogarth.
Freud, S. (1949b). Moses and monotheism. New York: Knopf.
Gittins, N. (1993). Sexual haarassment in the schools: Preventing and defending
against claims (2nd ed.). Alexandria, VA: National School Board Association.
Goodlad, J. (1984). A place called school: Prospects for the future. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Grant, G. (1988). The world we created at Hamilton High. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Gutmann, A. (1987). Democratic education. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Hall, R., & Sandler, B. R. (1982). The classroom climate: A chilly one for women?
Washington, DC: Association of American Colleges, Project on the Status and
Education of Women.
Hall, R., & Sandler, B. R. (1988). The chilly climate revisited. Washington, DC:
Association of American Colleges, Project on the Status and Education of
Women.
Jaschik, S. (1991, May 8). U. S. plans policies to fight harassment and bias at colleges.
Chronicle of Higher Education, 37(35), 26-27.

415

Lee, Croninger, Linn, & Chen
Jencks,C., & Mayer,S. E. (1990).The social consequencesof growingup in a poor
neighborhood.In L.E. Lynn,& M.McGeary(Eds.),Concentratedurbanpoverty
(pp. 111-186). Washington,DC:NationalAcademyPress.
Kanter,R. M. (1977). Men and women of the organization.New York:Basic.
Klein Associates. (1988). The 1988 WorkingWoman sexual harassmentsurvey
(Executivereport).Cambridge,MA:Author.
Larson,M. (1983). "Issexual harassmenta problemin your school?"TitleIXLine,IV
(1), pp. 9-11.
Lee,V. E., Bryk,A. S., & Smith,J. B. (1993).The organizationof effectivesecondary
schools. In L.Darling-Hammond
(Ed.),Reviewof researchin education(Vol. 19,
pp. 171-267). Washington,DC:AmericanEducationalResearchAssociation.
Lightfoot,S. L.(1983). Thegood highschool:Portraitsof characterand culture.New
York:Basic.
Linn,E. (1991).The checklist:How equitableis yourschool culture?EquityCoalition
for Race, Gender,and National Origin,II (1),14-15.
Linn,E., Stein, N. D., Young, J., & Davis, S. (1992). Bitterlessons for all: Sexual
harassmentin schools. In J. T. Sears(Ed.), Sexualityand the curriculum:The
politics and practicesof sexualityeducation (pp.10-123). New York:Teachers
College Press.
MacKinnon,C. A. (1979). Sexual harassmentof workingwomen. New Haven, CT:
Yale UniversityPress.
MacKinnon,C. A. (1993). Onlywords.Cambridge,MA:HarvardUniversityPress.
Marcuse,H. (1955).Erosand civilization:AphilosophicalinquiryintoFreud.Boston:
Beacon.
Mayer,S. E., &Jencks,C. (1989, March).Growingup in poor neighborhoods:How
much does it matter?Science,243, 1441-1445.
McCune,S., & Matthews,M. (1976). Complyingwith TitleIX:Implementinginstitutional self-evaluation.Washington,DC:U. S. Departmentof Health,Education,
and Welfare,NationalFoundationfor the Improvementof Education,Resource
Centeron Sex Roles in Education.
McLaren,P. (1994). Life in schools:An introductionto criticalpedagogy in the
foundations of education (2nd ed.). New York:Longman.
Morrison,T. (Ed.).(1992).Race-ingjustice,en-genderingpower:
Essayson AnitaHill,
ClarenceThomas,and the constructionof social reality.New York:Pantheon.
Myers,K. (1992). Genderwatch:
Aftertheeducationreformact. Cambridge,England:
CambridgeUniversityPress. (Originalwork published 1987)
NationalCouncilfor Researchon Women.(1994).Teen-on-teensexual harassment.

Issues Quarterly, 1 (1), 1-6.
Paludi, M. (Ed.). (1990). Ivorypower: Sexual harassment on campus. Albany: SUNY
Press.
Paludi, M., & Barickman, R. (1991). Academic and workplace sexual harassment: A
manual of resources. Albany: SUNY Press.
Rich, A. (1979). On lies, secrets, and silence. New York: Norton.
Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (1984). Essentials of behavioral research:Methods and
data analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sandroff, R. (1992, June). Sexual harassment: The inside story. Working Woman,
pp.4-51.
Sizer, T. R. (1984). Horace's compromise: The dilemma of the American high school.
Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Sizer, T. R. (1992). Horace's school: Redesigning the American high school. Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin.
Stein, N. (1981). Sexual harassment of high school students: Preliminary research

416

Sexual Harassment in Secondary Schools
results (Civil Rights/Chapter 622 Project). Quincy, MA: Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, Department of Education.
Stein, N., Marshall, N. L., Tropp, L. R. (1993). Secrets in public: Sexual harassment
in our schools. Wellesley, MA: Wellesley College, Center for Research on
Women.
Stein, N., & Sjostrom, L. (1994). Flirting or hurting? Washington, DC: National
Education Association.
Strauss, S. (1988, March). Sexual harassment in the school: Legal implications for
principals. NationalAssociation of Secondary School PrincipalsBulletin, pp. 93-97.
Tangri, S. S., Burt, M. R., & Johnson, L. B. (1982). Sexual harassment at work: Three
explanatory models. Journal of Social Issues, 38, 33-54.
Till, F. J. (1980). Sexual harassment: A report on the sexual harassment of students.
Washington, DC: National Advisory Council on Women's Educational Programs.
U. S. Department of Education, Office of Civil Rights. (1981). Title IX and sexual
harassment complaints (Internal memo to regional directors) [Available from
author]. Washington, DC: Author.
U. S. Merit Systems Protection Board. (1981). Sexual harassment offederal workers:
Is it a problem? Washington, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office.
U. S. Merit Systems Protection Board. (1987). Sexual harassment offederal workers:
An update. Washington, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office.
Weiss, L., & Fine, M. (1993). Beyond silenced voices: Class, race, and gender in
U. S. schools. Albany: SUNY Press.
Wexler, P. (1987). Social analysis of education: After the new sociology. New York:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
"What'shappening to you?" (1992, September). Seventeen Magazine, 51(9), 165.

ManuscriptreceivedJune 7, 1994
AcceptedNovember9, 1994

417

